Title
Review for Beethoven's 2nd (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Taking a look at the above rating, you might be tempted to make a
comment along the lines of, "Oh well, I guess the second BEETHOVEN
isn't as good as the first."  While that might seem a logical
assumption (given that a 3.9 isn't the kind of number on expects from a
rousing success), it ignores one basic fact:  I hated BEETHOVEN.  I
didn't just dislike the film, I loathed it--so much, in fact that it
managed to make by bottom 10 of 1992 list.
     Having made my feelings on the original perfectly clear, it's time
to examine this worthy dog (sorry, couldn't resist) of a sequel.  It is
better than its predecessor, and demonstrably so.  Before I "count the
ways," however, here are a few words about the storyline.
     It's puppy love for Beethoven, who falls prey to the wiles of a
female Saint Bernard named Missy.  Thus begins a series of clandestine
trysts in the basement of Missy's mean and vicious owner Regina (Debi
Mazar).  The end result is a group of four very young Beethoven clones
that end up hidden in the basement of George and Alice Newton (Charles
Grodin and Bonnie Hunt).  Surprisingly, the bulk of this movie is not
about how the dogs tear up the house.  Instead, the film is content to
focus upon the rather insipid lives of the three Newton children.  Only
at the end, when Regina and her sleazeball boyfriend (Chris Penn) try
to capture the puppies and off their dad, do the dogs take center
stage.
     Now it's time to compare the sequel to the original, and
understand why I didn't leave the theater shaking my head in disgust.
     To start with, BEETHOVEN'S SECOND made me laugh four or five times
more than the first movie (when I didn't chuckle once).  Some of the
jokes are rather cruel (along the lines of what happened to the crooks
in HOME ALONE), but they're still amusing.  An unintentional moment of
mirth comes from seeing Debi Mazar's too-obvious stunt double take a
fall for her.
     Second, Charles Grodin and Bonnie Hunt have settled into roles
that they seemed terribly embarrassed to be playing in BEETHOVEN.  Last
time around, the dog may have outacted them, but they get their revenge
this time, when they manage to give better performances than no fewer
than six canines.
     Third, there aren't nearly as many truly embarrassing moments
featuring the Newton kids.  In fact, Nicholle Tom (who plays Ryce
Newton) has a few scenes where she does something very much like
acting.
     Fourth, the story, as outlined above, isn't nearly as painful as
its predecessor.  Granted, this one is dumb, but it doesn't reach the
horribly inept levels to which BEETHOVEN sank.  This is a case of
general stupidity not quite being as pervasive.
     The audience at which BEETHOVEN is aimed is pretty much the same
as for the original.  Children younger than ten years of age will enjoy
themselves immensely, and adults who aren't much more discriminating
than their offspring will also have a good time.  However, those who
expect legitimate entertainment are in for an unfortunate surprise--not
that anyone should go into BEETHOVEN'S SECOND without a fair idea of
what they're going to get.  The basic premise is hardly a secret.
     On a more serious note, there is one area in which this film makes
an unforgivable blunder.  It attempts, in a rather offhand way, to
address the issue of teen date rape (no actual rape occurs, but it's
clear where things are headed).  This is turned into a big joke as
Beethoven literally brings down the house, but the introduction and
handling of this serious societal problem is worse than a
miscalculation--it's irresponsible and insensitive.  If a movie
intends to involve date rape, it should deal with the problem, not
treat it like a passing and inconsequential incident.
     BEETHOVEN'S SECOND is one of those movies that doesn't require a
review for the reader to determine whether or not he or she will be
entertained.  If you like Charles Grodin, Bonnie Hunt, Saint Bernards,
and/or the first BEETHOVEN, you'll find something to enjoy about this
movie, despite its numerous obvious faults.  Otherwise, don't bother.
Unless you have kids, that is.  Then you may not have a choice.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Rod Daniel's BEETHOVEN'S 2ND (1993) is the sequel to the
box office hit BEETHOVEN (1992).  Whereas the original stuck to formula
laughs with one slapstick gag after another, the sequel turns its
attention to character development and to the subject of love.
Although still not memorable entertainment, it is much better than the
first.
     In BEETHOVEN'S 2ND, the dog Beethoven and all of his canine
friends go looking for the opposite sex.  Even in the Newton household,
father George (Charles Grodin), wife Alice Newton (Bonnie Hunt), and
their three kids, Ryce (Nicholle Tom), Ted (Christopher Castile), and
Emily (Sarah Rose Karr) have love on their minds.  Except for Emily,
the kids find their first sweethearts and the parents try to help them
cope.
     First to find true love is Beethoven who hooks up with a St.
Bernard named Missy.  She has a large pink bow on her head so that the
audience realizes immediately that she is female.  It seems Missy is
owned by humans, Regina (Debi Mazar) and her ex-husband, who are in the
process of getting a divorce.  Regina tells her ex to pay her $50,000
for Missy, whom she actually hates, and screams at him, "If you want
your dog back, call my lawyer."
     Beethoven successfully hits it off with Missy, and the result is
four of the sweetest little puppies (Moe, Chubby, Dolly, and
Tchaikovsky) you have ever seen.  The movie's plot is about the kids
trying to hide the pups from their dad who thinks dogs are a pain and
about Regina, playing the Cruella de Vil role, trying to extort money
using Missy.
     Ryce enters what appears to be a sweet romance and gets her first
kiss in a touching scene.  Later in the film, we have an uncalled-for
sequence about underage drinking and the beginnings of date rape.  This
has no place in a sweet little nostalgic picture about love and
puppies.
     Ted, nicknamed Shorty, is always the last to be picked in baseball
and even then they do not want him.  My childhood was just like that so
this struck a chord with me.  Later when a girl he is trying to make an
impression on tells him he is too short for her, he reasons to her,
"Height is just temporary, right?  When you wake up in the morning,
you're a little taller."  Again, I can remember so well the sinking
feeling of being rejected for a date.  Did she really already have a
date for that night or was she just saying it so that you would go
away?
     Even little Emily comes alive in the sequel.  Although at 5 she is
too young for her first romance, she does get to be wiser.  When her
mom tells her something is too expensive for them, Emily retorts,
"We're not millionaires yet.  Are we thousandaires?"
     Bonnie Hunt's part as the mother is better drawn too than the
first, and Hunt is more animated.  Only Charles Grodin manages to give
just as dismal a performance in the sequel as in the original.  This
great comedic genius sleepwalks through both films.
     As in the original, the cinematography (Bill Butler) and the sets
(Lawrence Miller) are middle town America at its best.  A dreamy and
nostalgic feeling.  There are lots of nice images, my favorites being
one with a pup on George's head and one of a puppy on a skateboard.
     My favorite part of the picture is the ending, especially the
dream sequence and the "earthquake" scene.  I am not giving anything
away by telling you this, but when you see the show, you will recognize
them based on the above description.
     BEETHOVEN'S 2ND runs 1:29.  It is rated PG.  There are two
unnecessary minor cuss words and the inappropriate scene of underage
drinking and the start of date rape.  This is no sex, nudity or
violence.  The movie is fine for kids of any age although I do wish
they had deleted the above mentioned scenes.  My son Jeffrey (age 7)
liked both BEETHOVENs.  I liked this one a lot more than the first, but
not quite enough to recommend it.  I give it ** for its sweetness, but
I wish it would have had more substance.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
