Title
Review for Carousel (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Albert Sanchez Moreno
Just as "Oklahoma!" and "Carousel" were  Richard Rodgers and Oscar
Hammerstein II's first two stage musicals,so too were they the first
two R&H stage musicals to reach the screen. Frank Sinatra (of all
people) was originally set to play Billy Bigelow,and while he
certainly had the required toughness and acting ability, as well as a
great voice,he did not have the soaring ,huge baritone (or tenor) that
most stage Billys have.He didn't have the husky build,either.
Fortunately,he walked off the set when he found out that every scene
was to be filmed twice(for the then-new CinemaScope 55 process), and
so he was replaced by "Oklahoma!" star Gordon MacRae.who was perfect
for the role,and gave his best acting performance ever in the film.
The show is based on"Liliom", a once-popular,and now seldom revived
play by the great Hungarian playwright,Ferenc Molnar,which had itself
already been filmed three times-a Hungarian silent version,an early
talking version in 1930,and a French version in 1934 starring Charles
Boyer. The film version of "Carousel" is excellent,following the show
quite faithfully in its retelling of the doomed romance of carousel
barker Billy Bigelow (who was called Liliom in the Hungarian play)
and mill worker Julie Jordan. The biggest alteration,aside from the
cutting of some of the music, is the addition of a flashback framework
which gives away a vital plot point in the story ,and spoils a
surprise for those not familiar with the show. MacRae and co -star
Shirley Jones sing unforgettably,and Jones and the other cast members
(including musical star Barbara Ruick,opera stars Claramae Turner and
Robert Rounseville,and Cameron Mitchell singing quite well in his only
musical role) are also better-in fact I would go so far as to say that
this "Carousel" cast is possibly better than the original 1945
Broadway cast. The only section in which the film falters is in the
scenes in Heaven. Instead of showing the afterlife scenes as rather
eerie,and the ghosts as ghostly (as was unforgettably done in the film
version of "Our Town"(1940),we get a blue backdrop with styrofoam
stars hanging from wires and very realistic -looking people who are
supposed to be ghosts. Aside from this, "Carousel"has been very well
directed by Henry King,and the score boasts such memorable tunes as
"If I Loved You", "The Carousel Waltz", "You'll Never Walk Alone" and
the deeply moving "Soliloquy". The only performer who falls almost
completely flat is Susan Luckey as Billy's daughter Louise,who has
zero acting ability but dances very well. "Carousel"is one of the
great movie musical adaptations,beautifully filmed in Technicolor
(partially on location in Maine,and on the beach at San
Francisco,where Gordon MacRae sings the "Soliloquy". Perhaps because
of its somber,downbeat,yet uplifting story,this was the first and only
Rodgers and Hammerstein film to flop at the box office, but it
certainly deserved better than that.
