Title
Review for Prophet of Evil: The Ervil LeBaron Story (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the late 1970s, small Mormon sect, led by charismatic but
scrupless Ervil Le Baron (played by Brian Dennehy), begins
the campaign with the intention of becoming the dominant
force in the Mormon community. In doing so, any means are
necessary, including violence and physical elimination of
rivals. The sect seems unstoppable, until the dedicated
district attorney Daniel "Dan" Fields (Willliam Devane)
begins investigation and personal crusade with the intention
to bring Le Baron and cronies to justice.
Based on true events, this film is just another example of
assembly line philosophy that characterises American
television approach to the stories inspired by real life.
The result of such philosophy is gazillion of docudramas,
movies whose only value is the fact that save time and
resources for those viewers hungry for true-life stories,
yet unable, or unwilling to spend their precious time and
resources for reading books or articles. However, even in
the world of docudrama there are different layers of
quality. Some movies can be enjoyed by their own merit, and
some can't be saved even by fascinating subject.
PROPHET OF EVIL falls within the second category. Directed
by Judson Taylor, director who made more than fifty
television movies in his career, it shows the lack of any
interest by filmmakers. The interesting and fascinating
subject of little known inter-sectarian violence in American
Southwest is mostly ignored (MESSENGER OF DEATH, 1988 film
with Charles Bronson, was much better in exploring such
themes). What we get is the lame, predictable and sometimes
downright boring story, with Brian Dennehy, usually very
capable actor, making his character a third-grade
caricature. Same is with William Devane, as his adversary,
with boring subplots that fail to make his character human.
All in all, PROPHET OF EVIL is a film unworthy of both the
story and viewer's attention.
