Title
Review for Anchoress (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     Christine Carpenter sees a statue of the Virgin Mary being brought
to the church in her village and it is the most beautiful thing she has
ever seen.  She asks the priest if she can become an anchoress, and be
sealed up in the walls of the church for the remainder of her life, to
intercede with the Virgin on behalf of the village.  The priest offers
her a choice: "You must choose between the rotten meat of this world
and the milk and honey of paradise."
     Chris Newby's film of this true story very adeptly demonstrates
how Christine's naive and sensuous spirituality becomes the
battleground for the contention between the priest (who gets status
from having an anchoress in the walls of his church), the reeve of the
local manor (who wishes to marry her) and her midwife mother (who wants
her to be happy).
     The film is shot in monochrome and the bleak medieval landscapes
have the apocalyptic feel of Bergman's SEVENTH SEAL.  The atmosphere is
one of a God-forsaken, poverty-stricken subsistence community but the
camera superbly conveys Christine's unique vision of the world by
concentrating on the textures of her world: skin, stone, mud, water,
hair - in all of these Christine sees her vision of the Virgin.  There
is a scene in which she has escaped from her confinement and is
standing in the sand with her arms outstretched as if embracing the
sky, and the camera whirls and tilts as it follows her, perfectly
conveying her joy at being able to commune with the world again.
