Title
Review for Regarding Henry (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     REGARDING HENRY is the lastest in a series of intelligent movies
made by Mike Nichols, and starring Harrison Ford and Annette Benning.
While we can all go and gawk at a movie like TERMINATOR 2, REGARDING
HENRY is a well-acted, well-written, well-directed film that Hollywood
just doesn't make enough of.  It won't make mega-bucks, but I hope it
will do very well.
     Henry (Harrison Ford) is a hard-driven lawyer, who is in the wrong
place at the wrong time and is shot in the head by a convenience store
robber.  He is severely brain-injured, is in a coma for a week, and is
speechless for some time after his emergence from the coma.  Sarah
(Annette Benning) is stricken by his injury, but generally attempts to
keep a brave face.
     He's pulled out of his post-coma stupor by his therapists at a
rehab hospital.  Bradley (William Nunn) is a boisterous,
cut-the-bullshit therapist who inspires Henry to speak by throwing
Tabasco in his scrambled eggs, making him ask for something else.  In
time, Bradley pushes Henry to walk, and Henry's speech improves
gradually over the course of the movie.
      There's a major undercurrent in this theme about being tentative
about life.  Henry before the accident walked all over people and didn't
have a tentative bone in his body.  But, after the shooting, he's
extremely tentative (except when he takes up painting!).  Rachel (Mikki
Allen), Henry and Rachel's 12-year-old daughter, is the cautious,
tentative child of two rather driven, cold parents, and isn't sure how
to approach her now radically-different father.  Even Sarah, who very
much had her own agenda before the shooting, is sometimes reluctant to
make decisions afterward, even when Henry clearly can't.
      Reviewers will probably emphasize Ford's fine performance in this
picture, but I want to give special mention of Annette Benning.  She's
only been in a few movies so far, but she's made quite an appearance in
each.  In this movie, it would have been possible to play her as a
complete bitch, which Nichols and Benning chose not to do.  Sarah is a
very complicated character, and you often don't know what she's
thinking.  So as she blossoms into a "kinder, gentler" Sarah in the
last third of the movie, it's a very subtle transformation.
