Title
Review for One Hundred and One Dalmatians (1961)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Since it is just slightly less than 101 days until the opening of
the live action remake (with Glenn Close, Jeff Daniels, Joan Plowright
and Joely Richardson) of Disney's 1961 classic ONE HUNDRED AND ONE
DALMATIANS, we decided to watch the original cartoon version.  What fun
it is.
     As the show starts, a Dalmatian named Pongo (voice by Rod Taylor)
is contemplating ways to play matchmaker with his happy but recluse
owner and song writer, Roger Radcliff (voice by Ben Wright).  He does
this by looking for a woman with a female dog heading for the park.
After rejecting several unacceptable ones, he finds Anita (voice by
Lisa Davis) and her Dalmatian Purdy (voice by Cate Bauer).  As one of
many delightful little aspects of the film, notice how the owners and
their dogs look so much alike.
     Soon Anita and Roger are married, but in a twist it is the dogs
who are expecting.  Into their happy life comes hyper-evil Cruella De
Vil (voice by Betty Lou Gerson).  She is a classic cartoon figure of a
villain - very exaggerated, but effective.  She is as thin as a rail,
but wears an extra thick fur coat.  She has hair that is half black and
half white, and she smokes mile long cigarettes in a cigarette holder.
Although she could make great anti-smoking ads, here her evil is
manifested in her obsession for animal furs.  When she demands to know
when the pups will arrive, everyone is on their guard.  Soon over a
dozen pups arrive and are they ever cute.
     The drawing for the picture is a blend of the real and the
romantic.  Indoor scenes are highly detailed, but the outdoor scenes
have the look of a kid's storybook with the windows and doors lit up.
The music (George Bruns) and songs are tuneful, but not memorable which
works with lightheartedness of the script by Bill Peet, which is based
on a book by Dodie Smith.
     What is special about the movie are the small scenes.  My favorite
has all of the pups watching a black and white TV show about a cowboy
and a dog.  The pups are fascinated by it much as a human child would
be.  The most precious part is the plethora of little wagging tails.
Other sweet little nuances are the way the dogs call the humans their
pets.
     The tension in the story is supplied by a pair of bungling
dognappers named Horace (voice by Frederick Worlock) and Jasper (voice
by Pat O'Malley).  Cruella employs them to steal Dalmatian pups from
all over town, and they end up getting ninety-nine of them including
Pongo and Purdy's.  There is another delightful scene where the bad
guys and the pups watch Sunday's episode of "What's My Crime?"  Perhaps
those of you too young to remember "What's My Line?" will not be quite
so enchanted by it as I was, but it is a cute scene.
     Soon Pongo and Purdy use that time honored tradition of "the
barking chain" to find where their pups are hidden.  Now you finally
know what those dogs are doing every night when they keep you awake.
     ONE HUNDRED AND ONE DALMATIANS is not great drama, but it is a
children's story well told.  It should delight people of all ages.
>From start to finish it is a very sweet show.
     ONE HUNDRED AND ONE DALMATIANS runs just 1:29.  It is rated G, and
there is nothing to offend or scare anyone of any age - a great piece
of family entertainment.  Jeffrey (age 7) loved it as did I.  I
recommend it to you strongly and give the picture *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Frank Maloney
     Walt Disney took a new turn in full-length animated films when he
released 101 DALMATIANS in 1961.  Until that time, gothic fairy tales
were the norm for this genre.  When Walt nearly sank the studio in 1958
with the disastrous release of SLEEPING BEAUTY, he turned to different
material, a different style, and a different feel.  Some of the results
were pretty forgettable, but the first, 101 DALMATIANS, was fresh and
clever, an original, a novelty.
     The film has gone into a national re-issue for the first time since
1985, and for me it is still a beautifully drawn, charming, and
entertaining film.  The story is narrated by a male Dalmatian dog (you
know, the firehouse dog, the white short-hair with the black spots), who
first plots to mate his human "pet" and then has to save his and his
mate's puppies from the wonderfully off-the-wall villainous Cruela de
Vil.  The story is set in London and the English countryside; the
accents are English except for the two songs Pongo's human sings, which
is odd, but the songs are short.  This is not a musical, but the Pongo's
human is a professional songwriter.
     The story is one that ought to amuse adults, except perhaps for
those of the most severe sort.  It offers satirical notes of a
surprisingly sophisticated level.  However, children seem to have
changed in thirty years, what with the restricted attention spans and an
unrelenting diet of mayhem and violence, so that much of the
under-twelve element in my audience was pretty bored by the film, except
for the chase sequence that dominates the last third of the movie; even
there, the children stopped fussing and chatting only during the most
explosive or pratfall-filled parts.
     Two story elements broke a long Disney tradition.  No one's mother
dies.  And the villain does not have a villainous cat.  In fact, the
only cat in this doggy movie was Sargeant, who is instrumental in saving
99 Dalmatian puppies from Cruela's cockney henchmen.
     The art style is a kind of loosely constructed watercolor that I
associate with the late Fifties and early Sixties, and which I, as a
former denizen of that era, find very attractive.  The backgrounds are
rather luscious and detailed, but in a way a world away from the great
1930s animations like SNOW WHITE.
     The movements are smooth and natural.  In fact, so skill were the
Disney animators in capturing gesture and movement, that body language
tells part of the story, even as it does in live-action films.
     Cruela is, of course, a lot of fun, a kind of satire of the
wicked-stepmother prototype so basic to Disney and to fairy tales.  The
outward signs of her interior evil are probably more obvious and more in
line with general thinking than they were 30 years ago.  She smokes
cigarettes, polluting the air with a bilious miasma of smoke, and
scattering her ashes and butts with a vicious abandon.  She wears huge
fur coats; she loves fur and hates animals.  She drives a gas hog that
could easily be the origin of the bumper sticker "As a matter of fact, I
do own the road."  (Cruela's voice was supplied by Betty Lou Gerson, who
sounds like Tallulah Bankhead on speed.)
     Television comes in for a certain amount of satire, too.  One
charming sequence has Pongo, his mate, and their pups watching a Rin Tin
Lassie shoot-em-up; the pups are great in their reactions and their
engrossment in the TV.  Later the cockneys Horace and Jasper are so
wrapped up in a game show called "What's My Crime" that they make a
major mistake.  There is also a scene of the pups watching an old
cartoon with dancing flowers; I've seen that cartoon, it's real, and I
wonder how the Disney people got it to play on their cartoon TV in that
pre-computer era; it really looks like the original.  (There's also a
moment of a car plowing through heavy that looks like a innovation in
animation for the time; maybe someone can fill me in what it was I saw
-- it was not conventional cel animation.)
     The film is short, under ninety minutes, as were most of the
animated films, but may be too long for most young children.  I'd say
it's about the right length for adults and mature children.
     I can recommend 101 DALMATIANS, but I'd look for a cheap matinee
and I'd prepare to be tolerant about audience noise.
