Title
Review for Laberinto de pasiones (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tristan H E White
     This crazy story (Almodovar's 3rd feature-length movie) revolves
around four central characters: Riza Niro (Imanol "Intruder" Arias),
who is the son of the Emperor of Tiran, Sadec (a very young Antonio
"MAMBO KINGS/PHILADELPHIA" Banderas), the gay Islamic terrorist with
an amazing sense of smell, Sexilia (Celia Roth), the stunning singer
and nymphomaniac who is afraid of the sunlight, and Queti (Marta
Fernandez-Muro), the dry-cleaner's daughter, fan of Sexilia's and whose
father (Luis Ciges) rapes her, believing her to be his own estranged
wife.
     While hiding from the terrorists, Riza joins a punk band, and a
rapport develops between himself and Sexilia.  Throughout the film,
Sexilia works out in flashbacks how she became a nymphomaniac, afraid
of the sun, and how Riza discovered homosexuality.
     To really enjoy this film it seems almost essential to be a heavy
Almodovar fan.  Common themes (homosexuality, nymphomania, incest, hard
drugs, rock'n'roll, Madrid life) abound, here stronger than ever.  It
is a hard film to translate adequately into another language because of
the slang and humour of the Madrid "pasotas".  The script is fast,
lively and sparkling; the acting is both over-the-top and natural.  The
scenes of Madrid are as colourful as ever.
     Much of the script seems to be ad-lib, as if a hidden camera were
filming everything.  One of the best scenes is a photo-shoot with Fabio
(Fany McNamara) posing with a drill.  The ensuing conversation between
Fabio and Riza Niro must be one of the most memorable dialogues in
Almodovarian films.
     One interesting point concerning the acting is that neither the
terrorists nor Riza Niro make any attempt to feign a `foreign' accent,
and keep their pasota-ness throughout.  This is intentional, and used
for effect later on when Eusebio (Angel Alcazar) and his girlfriend
(Cristina S. Pascual) comment on this.  On the other hand, Helga Line
over-acts her role as Princess Toraya, adding to the delightful naivete
of the admirable casting.
     One of the jewels of the film is the evocative punk soundtrack.
In a club, Pedro Almodovar himself gets up on stage when the announced
band, "ELLOS", are late arriving.  He and Fabio (his then real-life gay
lover) sing a superbly kitch punk rock song, "Suck It To Me", written
by Almodovar himself.  Later on, when the transformed Riza Niro sings
"Gran Ganga", having been asked to sing because the original singer,
Eusebio, has broken his leg after Sexilia had made him slip down the
stairs on a banana skin, the crowd go wild with admiration.  Both "Gran
Ganga" (another song from the Almodovar-McNamara discography) and "Suck
It To Me" have become timeless classics in Spain among the punk-rock
followers.
     LABYRINTH OF PASSION is not a family film, but one for an
open-minded Almodovar follower.  There are many adult themes, though
nothing is depicted explicitly.  It is indeed a film to watch a hundred
times and never tire of. 10 out of 10.
