Title
Review for Giulia e Giulia (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     When we first see Julia (played by Kathleen Turner) she's happily
married--just married.  Her happiness lasts but a few hours, though, before
her husband Paolo (played by Gabriel Byrne) is killed in a car accident.
     We then jump forward seven years and see Julia going through the daily
routine of her life in a state not unlike that of a zombie.  Then suddenly
she finds herself in another world, one in which her husband didn't die, one
in which she is still married and has a young son.  But this world isn't all
sweetness and light either--Julia in this world is cheating on her husband
and being blackmailed by her lover to continue their relationship.  Like a
pendulum, she finds herself swinging back and forth between the two worlds,
first trying to understand what is happening and then trying to create the
world she wants.  This is made even more confused by the fact that the
person who in world two is her lover (played by Sting) also exists in world
one as someone Julia meets in the course of the film.
     Alternate histories are not common in film or television: QUEST FOR
LOVE, "City on the Edge of Forever" (STAR TREK), "Stay Tuned, We'll Be Right
Back" (DARKROOM), AN ENGLISHMAN'S CASTLE, and a few others.  Why are they
not common?  Well, maybe it's because alternate worlds are a mental concept
rather than an action concept (like car chases).  JULIA AND JULIA demands a
mental effort on the part of the viewer to keep track of who's where.  The
film itself is slow-moving and has a cold and distant feel.
     JULIA AND JULIA was shot on video, giving it a made-for-TV look.  The
Italian setting (it was made by RAI) is well-used but tends to distance the
story and make both worlds unfamiliar, adding to the distant feel.
Recommended for the more intellectually oriented viewer.
