Title
Review for Ombre du doute, L' (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     A princess is coveted by her father, the King, and escapes by
hiding in the skin of a donkey.  So goes the real fairy story, but in
eleven-year-old Alexandrine LeBlanc's version, the princess starves
herself until she is thin enough to fit through the bars of her window,
tries to fly away but is too weak, and drowns in the moat.  Her
teacher, reading this, is sure that something is wrong, and her concern
prompts Alexandrine to allege that her father has been sexually abusing
her.  Jean denies it: "I'm a father.  I could never do anything like
this.  It's unbelievable."  His lawyer agrees: "What's a child's word?"
Who is speaking the truth?
     True to its title, L'OMBRE DU DOUTE inhabits a world of shadows,
accentuated by heavy use of a blue filter.  In many scenes the
characters appear in silhouette: Alexandrine being chased through woods
by her father; shadows in the corridor outside her bedroom at night;
shadowy figures being led through corridors in the prison and in the
court.  Another shadow is cast by the white falcon, jean-le-blanc,
which haunts Jean's memories of childhood and stares accusingly at him
with glowing eyes from a painting in church.
     Several times we enter the imagination of Alexandrine: a figure
dressed in the skin of a donkey accosts her in the street in Bordeaux;
she flies around the house at night, banging her hands uselessly on
skylights in an attempt to escape.  These fantasies both support
Alexandrine--she is clearly disturbed--and undermine her credibility.
     Sandrine Blancke gives an extremely convincing portrayal of a
withdrawn, unhappy girl--we don't see her smile for the first hour--who
we nevertheless come to respect and like.  It is a great strength of
this film that we want to believe Alexandrine's story even though the
truth is hidden until the very end.  In most real cases of abuse, of
course, the truth never emerges.
