Title
Review for Robin Hood: Men in Tights (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     Anyone remotely familiar with the Robin Hood legend knows the
basic story behind this parody.  Robin (Cary Elwes) is the dashing hero
who, along with his band of Merry Men (which includes members Will
Scarlet O'Hara and Achoo the Moor), roams Sherwood Forest as the
champion of the common people.  His sworn enemy is the evil Sheriff of
Rottingham (Roger Rees), and his One True Love is Maid Marian (Amy
Yasbeck), she of the Everlast chastity belt.  To win the heart and hand
of Marian, Robin must defeat the Sheriff and his master, Prince John
(Richard Lewis).
     Imagine an amalgamation of THE NAKED GUN, ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF
THIEVES, and MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL, and you have a pretty
good idea what to expect from MEN IN TIGHTS.  This is a film packed
start-to-finish with satire, puns, one-liners, and other assorted
visual and audile jokes.  Nothing is too high-brow or low-brow for Mel
Brooks, although you can bet there are more occurrences of earthy humor
than that of the intellectual variety.  Every opportunity for humor, no
matter how feeble or juvenile, is seized upon.
     There have been several parodies already this year (LOADED WEAPON
ONE, HOT SHOTS: PART DEUX!, and LAST ACTION HERO come to mind), none of
which have attained the level of MEN IN TIGHTS.  That's not to say that
this is a masterpiece of any sort, but its jokes are more clever, more
original, and more consistently funny than those in the other movies.
In a HOT SHOTS-type film, the humor gets stale by the end of the first
half-hour, and most of the laughs have dried up long before the final
credits roll.  Mel Brooks, on the other hand, has enough experience
(not to mention flair) with this kind of motion picture, that he knows
to vary the humor so that the gags don't wear thin before the running
time has expired.
     That's not to say that everything Brooks does works.  There are a
fair share of clunkers in MEN IN TIGHTS.  But with such a non-stop
barrage of jokes, regardless of what percentage work, there's not much
time in between laughs.  And whether your kind of humor is along the
lines of Shakespeare or Cheech and Chong, there's something in this
movie sure to provoke laughter.
     In many ways, this is the Mel Brooks of old, the same master of
humor that brought us classics like YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN and BLAZING
SADDLES.  MEN IN TIGHTS is not as original, inventive, or hilarious as
those offerings, but it's a reasonable offering and certainly not in
the same dubious category as such Brooks duds like LIFE STINKS.  In
terms of scope, potential, and execution, this Robin Hood parody is
along the lines of SPACEBALLS, the Brooks take-off on STAR WARS.
     There's a fairly strong element of MONTY PYTHON in this movie.
While no one in their right mind would dare put this film on the same
level as THE HOLY GRAIL, there are moments in MEN IN TIGHTS that the
British comedy troupe would be proud of.  Most notably, perhaps, is the
rendition of the musical number, "Men in Tights," which bears a passing
resemblance to the Pythons' "Lumberjack Song."
     In a story that closely parallels the Kevin Costner account, Cary
Elwes does his best Errol Flynn imitation--a fine job acting serious
and swashbuckling amidst all the silliness around him.  The other major
players do reasonable jobs, from Roger Rees giving an over-the-top
performance that couldn't quite match that of Alan Rickman (from PRINCE
OF THIEVES) to a too-subdued Amy Yasbeck.
     As is frequently the case, those with cameos steal the show.  Dom
DeLuise shows up for one scene doing a superlative lampoon of Marlon
Brando from THE GODFATHER.  Patrick Stewart is on hand to imitate Sean
Connery's King Richard from PRINCE OF THIEVES.  Not only does he strike
as regal a figure as Connery, but he does an excellent job of mimicking
the accent.
     There are so many jokes in this movie that it's difficult to pick
out a memorable one or two.  Among the more subtle ones, I was partial
to the "moving mole" on Richard Lewis' face.  Nearly every time we see
Prince John, his rather sizeable mole has moved somewhere else.  At one
point, the Sheriff even feels compelled to mention this.  Then there's
Mel Brooks as Rabbi Tuckman (instead of Friar Tuck), who gives "half
off" circumcisions.  Most of the overblown musical numbers are also
fun, with obviously-dubbed singing voices and rappers fulfilling the
function of a Greek Chorus.
     Parodies are hard films to do, as the mediocre success of so many
recent ones has shown.  No matter how ripe a film or genre might be for
mocking, unless you know how to do it, there are no guarantees.
Fortunately for MEN IN TIGHTS, Mel Brooks has been doing this kind of
thing for decades.  As the ads say, "The legend had it coming", and
this film certainly dishes out all that the Merry Men can handle--and
more.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Marc Y. Wasserman
     ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS is another Mel-Brooks-produced film in
the classic tradition of movies like BLAZING SADDLES and YOUNG
FRANKENSTEIN.  Mel Brooks is well known for his comic look at regular
life, his fast paced dialogue and sharp wit.
     Unfortunately, ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS has none of the easy
going humor of BLAZING SADDLES, none of the fun acting of YOUNG
FRANKENSTEIN, is devoid of the charm of SPACEBALLS, and is even lacking
the good, solid dialogue of HISTORY OF THE WORLD.  It is, in short, one
of the worst movies I have seen Mel Brooks, or anybody else, produce.
     The plot borrows heavily from the well-received Kevin Costner
movie of last year, ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF THIEVES.  This is not
surprising in and of itself, and could have been used to great comic
effect, mainly by parodying scenes from the orginal movie.  Mel Brooks
does not take advantage of this, however, and uses the film to launch
several ideas into the air, none of which connect and none of which are
explained later on.  The movie's scenes could be shuffled around in any
order and one would be hard pressed to notice.
     Cary Elwes, of PRINCESS BRIDE fame, plays Robin of Loxley, a man
who was captured in the Crusades, fighting with King Richard.  He
escapes and, joining with a man named Achoo (I am sure you can see the
obvious joke), fights in England to reclaim his name and the throne for
Richard, which has been captured by evil Prince John, played by funny
comic Richard Lewis.  He also tries for the love of Maid Marian and
attempts to overthrow the evil "Sheriff of Rottingham".  A good
adventure plot that is sadly unused.
     Elwes and Lewis are both excellent comics, but the dialogue in the
movie is simply excruciating.  Neither actor has any good words to work
with, and the lines simply aren't funny, nor believable.  Perhaps the
worst example of this is when the group of merry men encounter a man
playing a Macaulay Culkin clone from the hit movie HOME ALONE.  This
particular scene is so out of place and so badly acted, and followed by
so many other scenes of equal miserable ideas, that I really felt like
leaving the theatre.  Much of the audience continued to look at their
watches throughout, and some left the theatre.  Chuckles were few and
far between, and they mostly dealt with visual jokes (such as an old,
beaten up horse from "Rent-a-Wreck") then from any dialogue
whatsoever.  Scenes that could have been classics, such as the archery
contest, are ruined by poor acting.
     Perhaps the largest problem with the movie is that it is simply
offensive.  The basic plot, that Robin has received a key that will
unlock the chastity belt of Maid Marian, is not witty nor funny.  Mel
Brooks as a circumcision-giving rabbi is also offensive to me and
others in the audience (not all Jewish, either).  The movie simply
tries to hard trying to be funny and by and large fails.  The addition
of a blind man who stumbles around, falling off cliffs, walking into
ledges and being a general buffoon could have had some humorous
potential, but is also made terribly offensive.
     The only reason to see this movie is the surprise actor at the end
who plays King Richard.  He is well worth waiting for, if you can stand
an hour and half of unfunny dialogue, excruciating visual humor, old
puns, ancient jokes and bad acting.  If you can't, don't even bother
watching this miserable film.

Author
Mark Stantz
[This was written by a friend of the poster and was forwarded to the net
with his permission.  Caution: minor spoilers.]
Starring Cary Elwes, Roger Rees, Richard Lewis and Amy Yasbeck.
Directed by Mel Brooks.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I have a housemate who works for a theater concessions company,
and periodically he can get us in free at the theaters where his
company does business.  "Robin Hood: Men in Tights" was showing at one
of these theaters.  I shelled out nothing more than an hour and forty
minutes of my life.
     ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS is co-writer/director Mel Brooks' stab
at the swashbuckler genre, most specifically the 1991 Kevin Costner
vehicle ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES.  Cary Elwes is Robin of Loxley,
who returns from the Crusades to find England in the grip of the
usurper Prince John (Richard Lewis) and his muscle the Sheriff of
Rottingham (Roger Rees).  The story, of Robin's attempts to free the
kingdom and to win Maid Marian, is a thin frame on which to hang a
collection of sight gags and groaners, almost none of which work.
     MEN IN TIGHTS ranks among the most excruciating movie-going
experiences I've ever had, and it's a damned shame.  Once upon a time,
Mel Brooks was funny.  There is evidence.  He was a writer for "Your
Show of Shows," co-created "Get Smart" and created such classic film
parodies as YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN and BLAZING SADDLES.  But for the past
fifteen years, his screen efforts have ranged from the dreadfully
uneven HISTORY OF THE WORLD, PART I to the breathtakingly dumb
SPACEBALLS to the pointless LIFE STINKS.  I honestly didn't think it
could get any worse.
     Unfortunately, it got much worse.  MEN IN TIGHTS is a failure on
so many different levels, it's difficult to know where to begin.  The
acting is at times unwatchably bad, with Richard Lewis the primary
culprit, guilty of first degree mugging.  There was an editor in the
credits, so I assume there was one, although the positively leaden
pacing provides no evidence that he did anything but pick up a check.
And then there is the script, a cavalcade of miserable puns that goes
on...
     ...and on, and on, and on.  Then there is the requisite Brooksian
bodily function humor, and the gay jokes, and the breast jokes.  Then
there are moments when you know there was supposed to be some kind of
joke somewhere, but for the life of you, you can't figure out what it
was.  This is a film so jaw-droppingly unfunny that the few positive
reviews I've seen seem absolutely incomprehensible to me.
     What's even more of a shame is that Cary Elwes' Robin Hood is
actually quite charming.  He generates such enormous good will,
striking arms akimbo poses at every opportunity and doing his level
best to underplay his part, that I kept holding out hope that it might
get better.  Even more depressing is the cameo appearance by Patrick
Stewart as King Richard, a la Sean Connery in PRINCE OF THIEVES.
Whatever it was that they paid him, it couldn't possibly have been
enough.
     On the Renshaw scale of 0 to 10 arrows: 1 arrow, right through the
heart of whoever green-lighted this piece of garbage.
