Title
Review for Small Wonders (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Exhilarating, heartwarming, profoundly moving!   All that and
very entertaining. This is a documentary which shows that one person
can move and change the environment and lives of children.   Teacher
Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras has done just that.   This film about her
dedication and achievements leaves you with a great feeling and a hope
for the future.
     When school funds were cut, the Arts were the first to be axed.
Music teacher Roberta would not take "no" for an answer.  She rallied
parents and friends to support her program to teach the violin to the
little kids in three schools in NYC.:  Central; Park East 1, Central
Park East 2, and RiverEast Elementary School.   Most of the children
attending those schools were from minority and poor families but
Roberta enriched their lives as she taught them to play and love the
violin.    Each year 150 children were chosen by lottery to be in the
program.   The sad part is that there was not enough funds available
to include many more children and that it is just in NYC when it
should be in every school in our country.   Violins, not guns, should
be our goal.
     It is a delight to see the children from different ethnic groups,
as they play Bach with an intensity and dedication one would not
expect of youngsters.   We see one of the annual concerts, this one at
Carnegie Hall, with the great Isaac Stern and Itzhak Perlman aLong
with many other famous professionals,  joining them in the
performances.
     There is no question about Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras' dedication
and love of music and children.    You will not want to miss this
wonderful film.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Exhilarating, heartwarming, profoundly moving!   All that and
very entertaining. This is a documentary which shows that one person
can move and change the environment and lives of children.   Teacher
Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras has done just that.   This film about her
dedication and achievements leaves you with a great feeling and a hope
for the future.
     When school funds were cut, the Arts were the first to be axed.
Music teacher Roberta would not take "no" for an answer.  She rallied
parents and friends to support her program to teach the violin to the
little kids in three schools in NYC.:  Central; Park East 1, Central
Park East 2, and RiverEast Elementary School.   Most of the children
attending those schools were from minority and poor families but
Roberta enriched their lives as she taught them to play and love the
violin.    Each year 150 children were chosen by lottery to be in the
program.   The sad part is that there was not enough funds available
to include many more children and that it is just in NYC when it
should be in every school in our country.   Violins, not guns, should
be our goal.
     It is a delight to see the children from different ethnic groups,
as they play Bach with an intensity and dedication one would not
expect of youngsters.   We see one of the annual concerts, this one at
Carnegie Hall, with the great Isaac Stern and Itzhak Perlman aLong
with many other famous professionals,  joining them in the
performances.
     There is no question about Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras' dedication
and love of music and children.    You will not want to miss this
wonderful film.
