Title
Review for Io speriamo che me la cavo (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     With some nine movies between 1963 and 1976, director Lina
Wertmuller became a cult figure, admired for her caustic humor, social
criticism, excesses, farcical or steamy sexuality, absurdism and
maverick filmmaking.
     SEVEN BEAUTIES (1976) made her the first woman to be
Oscar-nominated as a director.  But her next film (1978), starring
starring Giancarlo Gianini and Candice Bergen, THE END OF THE WORLD IN
OUR USUAL BED IN A NIGHT FULL OF RAIN failed.  The dozen pictures that
followed, for sundry reasons, made no more than a ripple.  Wertmuller
almost disappeared from the international scene.
     With CIAO, PROFESSORE! she is back at the head of the class.
The film is much more mainstream, toned-down and warm than previous
ones by Wertmuller..  At the same time, she uses her sharpness and
irony in unpretentious, un-showy ways that protect the movie from
facile sentimentalism.
     The picture is based on "Me, Let's Hope I Make It," a book which I
suppose was written by a teacher about his experiences.  That was also
the movie's title at the 1993 Toronto Film Festival, after which it
became CIAO, PROFESSORE!
     The basic story -- new teacher conquers, and is conquered by, a
difficult class -- is not new, but its specific context, details and
variations on a familiar theme, make it fresh and original.
     Marco Tullio Sperelli had asked to be transferred to the northern
town of Corsano but was mistakenly assigned to Corzano in the south, a
grimy, dilapidated, impoverished, lawless disaster area in the region
of Naples.
     At school, three-fourths of Sperelli's third-grade students are
no-shows, but many can be located, at work around the mean streets of
Corzano as a waiter, a hawker of stolen cigarettes, an ice-cream
seller, a barber's assistant, a flegdling racketeer.
     Corruption reigns, from the Mayor (a party to breaking child-labor
and school-attendance laws), to the school's black-marketeer janitor
(he sells cakes as well as chalk and toilet-paper to teachers and
pupils), to his do-nothing janitress/cleaning lady wife, to the
absentee, perpetually pregnant school director who accepts everything
-- and everything is wrong -- with a shrug and a smile.
     Corpulent Sperelli, who looks somewhat like a kindly Luciano
Pavarotti, corrals his pupils and soon finds out what a miserable
existence most of them lead.  With patience, tolerance and humor (much
of it at his own expense) he treats the youths like humans, disciplines
them with wit and imagination, teaches them some academic things and
some values -- while he himself learns about life in the area.  We may
be in recognizable territory, but it is light-years away from The
Blackboard Jungle type of movies.
     One assignment to the kids is to write parables.  This is
particularly relevant as the movie itself is also a parable of Italy's
North vs. South.  The North is industrial, affluent, developed and
"cultivated."  Northerners often looks down upon a South (the
"Mezzogiorno") perceived as foreign and backward.  They can be repaid
with suspiciousness and defensiveness born of inferiority complexes.
     The North-South gap is cunningly symbolized by the Southerners'
peculiar pronunciation of De Amicis -- the school being named after
Edmondo De Amicis, the writer whose "Cuore" (Hearts), a book about
school-children, may well be the most read classic in Italy.
     Sperelli is a Northerner, but a friendly one, with minimal
prejudices and maximum good will.  He appreciates nature's beauty and
some aspects of southern hospitality.  He accepts peculiarities,
superstitions, and soon he understands a great deal : the conditions
that make the locals take the Camorra and its drug traffic for
granted. (The subtitles call it Mafia, but the Mafia is Sicilian, the
Ndragheta is Calabrian and the Camorra is Neapolitan); the bright kid
whose dream is "to be a man" (read "above the law") and "feel nothing";
the proliferation of births; the prematurely wise little girl who is
the head of a wretched household; the sleepy boy who has to stay up
nights helping his father to collect discarded cardboard in the
streets; the fat boy who takes refuge in overeating.
     Sperelli is not merely a routine teacher, but a self-appointed
social worker.  Knowledge comes to him in little shock waves mixed with
a constant flow of comic moments.
     The kids are street-wise.  One of the movie's charms is the
amusing-sad way they talk like grown-ups, with adult gestures, body
language and a rich scatological vocabulary.  Appealing too is the fact
that in spite of little schooling, the kids know a surprising (albeit
oddly interpreted) amount of things academic, from anthropology to
geography.  They are fast learners and fast thinkers, and the bond that
grows between them and their teacher is a delight.
     This bond is predictable, but the uninhibited give-and-take of the
dialogue, the succession of clever, believable events, their details,
the acute, specific observations of the ethos and lifestyles of
Neapolitan culture, take you from small surprises to larger
revelations.
     CIAO, PROFESSORE! is a very serious funny movie, excellently
written, directed and played.  A picture that has five writers spells
catastrophe in Hollywood, but in Italy many of the very best films have
had several scenarists.
     When Sperelli leaves for good, neither he nor we, the viewers,
harbor illusions.  What the Professore has contributed may be no more
than band-aid treatment.  Yet, as he goes away, the two-way affection
will remain with him and in the hearts of Corzano.
[published  4 Sept. 1994.  Minor cosmetic changes 25 Dec. 1995]

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Paolo Villaggio, Isa Danieli, Esterina Carloni 
Director:  Lina Wertmuller 
Producers:  Mario and Vittorio Cecchi Gori 
Screenplay:  Lina Wertmuller, Leo Benvenuti, and Piero De Bernardi 
             based on ME, LET'S HOPE I MAKE IT by Marcello D'Orta 
Cinematography:  Gianni Tafani 
Released by Miramax Films 
In Italian with subtitles 
"The book [ME, LET'S HOPE I MAKE IT] is a fascinating, allegoric and
desperate image of what the children were feeling.  The focal point for
me was to create the confrontation between the teacher who comes from
the north and the children who are living the reality of the culture of
the south.  Telling a story about Naples would have been easier to do
because in a big city there is a lot of criminality.  But one of our
choices was to make a film in a small village without the violence."
          - Lina Wertmuller, co-writer/director, CIAO PROFESSORE!
     CIAO PROFESSORE! is the story of Marco Sperelli (Paolo Villaggio),
a northern Italian teacher who gets dumped in the southern Italian town
of Corzano because of a bureaucratic screw-up (he was supposed to get
an assignment in Corsano).  At the De Amicis school, he has been
assigned to teach third grade, but when he arrives, he finds the place
run by the janitor.  Only three of his fifteen students are in class -
the rest are out working on the streets, hustling black market goods
and helping their families make ends meet.  So, taking matters into his
own hands, Sperelli makes a trip through the village to collect his
delinquent pupils personally.
     The story of a teacher and students learning from one another is a
popular thematic mine that directors keep exploring.  Just when you
think all the ore has been removed, however, someone like Lina
Wertmuller comes along and strikes a new vein.  CIAO PROFESSORE! is a
remarkable film, primarily because it possesses a level of honesty that
most productions of this sort abandon in favor of mawkishness.
     Wertmuller, who learned some of her craft from Fellini (she was
his assistant director on 8-1/2), has primarily been known for
controversial films.  Those used to her normal fare (such as SWEPT AWAY
and SEVEN BEAUTIES) will find CIAO PROFESSORE! a distinct departure.
Instead of focusing on issues like sexuality, revenge, and madness,
this movie makes do with a simple message of hope.
     The bonding of Sperelli with his students is achieved with care
and consideration.  There is no single incident that galvanizes the
process.  Trust comes slowly, especially after the teacher slaps a
belligerent young boy.  Yet as they spend more time together, each side
discovers a little more about the other and, through that learning,
gains understanding.  By the end, it's difficult to decide who has
changed more:  the professor, his pupils, or their families.
     Given the time constraints of keeping this film to a reasonable
length, Wertmuller does a marvellous job fleshing out a unique
personality for each of the students.  This is not a motion pictures
where the children blend together into a faceless mass, with only one
or two standouts.  Through a series of short vignettes, the director
tells something about the conditions that have shaped their individual
lives.
     CIAO PROFESSORE! is rich in humor, much of which is grounded in
the raw language used by the children.  Even in the most serious
circumstances, Wertmuller never allows this motion picture to become
maudlin or melodramatic.  A relentlessly upbeat, occasionally-playful
atmosphere pervades the film, as typified by the repeated use of the
song "What a Wonderful World."
     One of the key ingredients to the success of CIAO PROFESSORE! is
the cast.  The adult actors, especially Paolo Villaggio (who played one
of Italy's most enduring film characters, Fantozzi, and was in
Fellini's last film, THE VOICE OF THE MOON), do fine jobs.  The most
remarkable performances, however, come from the troupe of young actors
cast to play the children.  With their fresh faces and unforced style,
each captures the essence of the character Wertmuller chose for them.
     CIAO PROFESSORE! premiered to high acclaim on the international
film festival circuit (where it was called by its original title, ME,
LET'S HOPE I MAKE IT).  The accolades are well-deserved.  This is a rare
movie- going experience--an artistic film that's both unpretentious
and optimistic.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     What a delightful, heart-warming, film!   What a dedicated teacher
and what a bunch of irresistible third grade rascals he inherits as his
students ... just as soon as he can round them up from their busy work
schedules.
     Professore Spetelli (Paulo Villaggio) is the maestro who finds
himself in a suburb of Naples in southern Italy.  He had asked to be
assigned to the town of Corsano but through a computer error he is
appointed to teach at Corzano where the Mafia rules, where his students
are truants who work in the barber shop, the gas station, engage in the
black market and are priming themselves to graduate to the Mafia.
Maestro Spetelli involves himself with the students and, eventually,
they with him in this hilarious yet poignant film.
     Villaggio is wonderful; the kindness shines from his face.   The
young boys and girls are uninhibited in their language and their acting
is astonishingly  superb.  Put that all together, hand the reins over
to a great director, and you come up with perhaps the best film so far
this year.
Directed beautifully by Lina Wertmuller.
