Title
Review for Madonna: Truth or Dare (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     When MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE was in the theaters I didn't see any
reviews for it posted, so when I saw it on video I decided that I should
write a review for it.  The film is a documentary about what life is
like for Madonna, backstage on tour.  It covers her Blond Ambition tour
and contains concert footage stuck in between stops on the tour.
     MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE is rated R for explicit language, adult
situations, and female nudity.  I give the film a four on a zero to five
scale.  The film is very well done and is worth checking out from your
local video store.
     When Madonna was on the Blond Ambition Tour in 1990 she taped
everything that happened in her life.  When it was over, the tapes were
looked at and the highlights were put together for the film.  Parts of
the tour that are included in the film are what the dressing rooms were
like just before performance time, and how her dancers got along with
each other.
     This film was quite well done and edited together very well.  The
concert footage was done in color, the part that Madonna taped was done
in grainy black & white, and the rest of the film was shot in black &
white.  The way this all looks when it is put together is surprisingly
well.
     The ads for MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE, when the movie was in the
theaters and just before it came on to video, made the film look like it
was all sexually oriented.  The film has very few sexual spots in it.
     MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE is interesting to watch and I highly
recommend it to anyone interested in Madonna, or in what it is like for
a performer on tour.  It covers many of the problems that might occur
when an artist is on tour; sudden illness, loss of voice, police
problems, fights between her dancers, etc.
