Title
Review for Artists and Models (1955)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Most recent revelations about Columbine High School
shootings would probably give new fuel to the endless debate
about the role of popular media in the increase of youth
violence in USA. This debate, however, isn't anything new.
Four decades ago eminent psychologists, religious leaders
and politicians were fighting another, yet very similar,
crusade against violence in popular entertainment. Their
objects were comic books, targeted as the prime cause of
rising level of violence and pathological behaviour among
American youths. Contemporary Hollywood mostly ignored such
debate, which would later establish new standards of
self-censorship in American comic book industry. The only
exception was ARTISTS AND MODELS, 1955 film by Frank
Tashlin, which actually used it as a backdrop for one of the
silliest and funniest comedies of its time.
The plot deals with two struggling Greenwich Village artists
and best childhood friends. Rick Todd (played by Dean
Martin) wants to become a famous painter, and Eugene
Fullstack (played by Jerry Lewis) wants to publish his
children's books. Unfortunately, somewhere along the way,
Eugene became obsessed with Bat Lady comic books - he spends
all his time reading them and, as a result, he can't keep
jobs. Which is even worse for Todd, who shares apartment
with him, violent content of these comic books caused Eugene
to have very graphic nightmares every night. His dreams, on
the other hand, come closer to reality, because Abigail
Parker (played by Dorothy Malone), the author of the Bat
Lady comic books, lives in the same building, together with
Bessie Sparrowbrush (played by Shirley MacLaine), girl who
works as a model for Bat Lady. While Eugene must distinguish
his fantasies from reality, Rick is more down-to-earth -he
finds that Eugene's nightmares could serve as an excellent
basis for his own violent comic books. Such comic books
become instant success, but the secret formula mentioned in
them brings attention of FBI and foreign spies.
At first glance, ARTIST AND MODELS looks like a disorganised
mess of a movie - plot is weak, almost non-existent, and
serves only as an excuse for the series of gags and musical
numbers. Characterisation is also weak - we are to believe
that Eugene is sensitive enough to write nothing other than
children's books, yet in the same time he is obsessed with
more violent Bat Lady comic books. Romantic pairings between
characters are also predictable. Feminists would probably
frown upon Amy, strong professional woman, being portrayed
as artist to Rick, as well as totally defenceless towards
his manly charm. Their anger, on the other hand, would be
compensated with Eugene being the passive side in the
relationship with Bessie. At the end, Cold War subplot
involving Space Race and espionage makes the film longer
than it should be. But, all those flaws are compensated
thanks to the excellent team consisted of three very
different talents. Jerry Lewis and his clownish image,
suitable for visual humour is nicely contrasted with his
more earthly partner Dean Martin and his verbal cynicism.
Their different but symbiotic personalities are used by
Frank Tashlin staged elaborate and very funny gags thanks to
his own experiences of cartoonist. All that provide a lot of
laughs, with humour still working despite being somewhat
tame by today's standards. And even the song numbers work,
thanks to Dean Martin's singing talent.
Additional laughs in this film come when we take into
account future events. Brief REAR WINDOW reference
foreshadows Tarantinoesque homages of 1990s. Space Race
subplot with American generals boasting about their country
being the first one to send man-made object into the
universe was probably not that entertaining after Sputnik
hysteria two years later. And Shirley MacLaine here plays
character obsessed with astrology, numerology and other
parascientific disciplines, not very different from the
actress herself two or three decades later. All in all,
ARTISTS AND MODELS is one of those brilliant examples of Old
Hollywood craftsmanship - film that aged like wine, still
being able to entertain the audience after almost half a
century.
