Title
Review for In the Company of Spies (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "IN THE COMPANY OF SPIES" (SHOWTIME TV)
         On Sunday night (Oct. 24) at 8 PM, Showtime TV presents an
original espionage thriller that revolves around the CIA in this
contemporary era of increased openness and accountability. Tom
Berenger stars as a retired operative who angrily resigned five years
ago from his position as head of the East Asian division and has since
opened a Thai restaurant in Washington, D.C... He's brought back into
action by his former boss, Ron Silver, to save a colleague who has
been captured by the North Korean authorities.  Korean Internal
Security (KIS) knows the suspected agent possesses valuable knowledge
of a covert operation but they don't know its nature, nor does the
CIA.  Berenger's assignment is to find out what the spy knows and to
try to save his life. As the story unfolds, a small team of American
spies, whose remarkable talents combine the newest technological
techniques with old-fashioned infiltration work, reveals that, indeed,
something sinister and critical is brewing in North Korea, something
that could conceivably threaten the United States. The believable
story portrays today's CIA in a realistic light, which helped the
producers become the first film-makers to receive true access to the
operational world of the Agency, filming some of the scenes at CIA
Headquarters in Langley, Virginia. But its really the meticulously
developed, character-driven script by Roger Towne ("The Natural"),
expertly directed by Tim Matheson, that makes this presentation so
compelling. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "In the Company of
Spies" is a compelling, suspenseful 8.
 This made-for-TV spy saga is as good or better than any you'll see at local
 movie theaters.
