Title
Review for Rush (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
     I've waited for this film for more than a year; high expectations
seemed reasonable given the cast and Wozencraft's novel.  In some ways,
these expectations were more than met.  Parts of RUSH fill the screen
with such force and angst that they spill into the rest and lift the
film from the mediocre to the accomplished.  Yet to be fair, the film
has too much Hollywood rubbed into it.  I'll explain that later.  For
now, let's visit the story.
     Why would anyone actually choose to be an undercover narcotics cop?
A hatred of pushers?  A thrill at worming your way into a closed, secret
society?  A love of danger with the accompanying high that only an
adrenalin rush can give you?  And once you get there--once you are a
narc--how do you insinuate yourself into this other lifestyle without
having it permeate your very sense of self?
     Kristin Cates (Jennifer Jason Leigh) is the novice who wants to
"make a difference."  She's driven by ideals.  In direct contrast is Jim
Raynor (Jason Patric), the experienced narc who picks her for his
partner.  If he ever felt the same drive, it was several lifetimes ago.
Now he does his job, he does it well, and he does nothing else.
     Why did he pick Kristin for his partner?  He says it's because of
her edge--something he saw in her during a competitive track event that
he watched.  But she is also a tender young thing, completely unsullied.
The contrast between them is extreme, and his attraction to her speaks
volumes about his own psyche.  He trains her carefully, gently, quietly.
She is very willing:  the best partner Jim could ever pick, and the
worst one.  (Think how much further you used to go on a dare than you 
would have gone on your own.)
     On the surface, all they have to do is buy drugs without having
their  cover exposed, put the drugs in manila evidence folders with the
pertinent  details of the buy, and hand the folders over to Captain
Dodds (Sam Elliott).  The drug busts will occur all at once.  
     So much for the surface.  The danger of the job is that they must
appear to be  heavily into drugs.  They are "on-stage" full-time, and
their work requires  total immersion in a drug-based lifestyle.  If the
only way dealers will trust  them is to take drugs with those dealers,
so be it.  But what happens to a narc  when the adrenalin rush is
surpassed by a different type of rush?  And what happens when ties to
dealers or informants become stronger than ties to other  cops and the
"outside" world?
     Zanuck has said that she didn't want to glamorize the allure of
drugs but also didn't want to fill the screen with cliche-ridden images
of rat-infested drug dens.  She said she wanted to present the
challenges and choices of the characters without manipulating the
audience.  She accomplished part of her goal: the audience sure does
get acquainted with the challenges.  Less successful is Zanuck's goal of
showing choices.  Jim and Kristin seem forced into much of what occurs,
rather than making choices.  In fact, this film has large gaps between
events, undermining the impact.
     Sometimes it's hard to know where the director had problems and
where the script fell short.  Many of the problems seem to result
directly from screenwriter Dexter's adaptation of the Wozencraft novel.
The gaps between vignettes make for a very sudden decline instead of a
gradual one.  And the ending?  It is W R O N G.  Simple-minded
Hollywood.
     However, it is clear that some of the directorial decisions were,
uhm, suboptimal.  One scene in particular was supposed to show
desperation but struck me as downright laughable.  Another flaw that
rests squarely on Zanuck's shoulders is the use of Eric Clapton's
"buy-my-CD" score: it sometimes drowns out the dialog.  (And the
occasional guitar solo is demandingly loud, detracting from what the
actors are trying to do.)
     Zanuck's strength may be in eliciting controlled performances from
her actors.  The role of Raynor must have been quite a challenge: he is
inarticulate.  He simply cannot talk about what he is going through.
Patric turns in an outstanding performance, using physicality instead of
dialog to communicate with his partner and with his audience.  In a
couple of scenes, he portrays Raynor as bewildered, vulnerable,
frightened, and out of control.  Most actors tend to hold back
something; they play at being exposed.  Patric does not play at it, and
his performance is beyond acting.  In another scene earlier in the film,
he inserts a needle into his arm.  Matter-of-factly, a demonstration for
the rookie.  Watch that scene closely.  It's not done with special
effects.  Patric inserts the needle for real: it's frightening, just as
Zanuck wanted.
     Leigh's performance is weak at the beginning but deepens
substantially around a quarter of the way through the film, and in the
last half, she is superb.  When Patric and Leigh share the screen, they
are riveting.  Their partnership is outstanding.  Equally impressive is
Max Perlich as a strictly small-time middle-man.  Considerably less
convincing is Sam Elliott, who always seems to be posing for the
camera.  Most of his scenes slow the pace of the film.  Greg Allman has
received praise for his performance, but not by me.  He lacked the
menace and presence demanded of his role.  Directly contrasting Allman's
lackluster performance is Special K McKray  (yes, that's what the
credits said...), who plays a dealer and turns a  5-minute scene into
the definition of danger in the drug world.  Whew.
     Bottom-line time.  Is the film worth seeing?  Yes.  Look past the
Hollywood machinations in the script, the occasional directorial goof,
and a few unconvincing moments.  Underneath the problems are
performances that occasionally nail you to your chair and routinely
overcome most of the problems with the film.  It's worth going to see,
and it's a promising first film for Zanuck, but some may prefer seeing
this at matinee prices.  (A few unique, effective shots won't make it in
TV aspect ratio, so don't wait for video.)
Sandy Grossmann       sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com 

Author
Brian L. Johnson
117 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: Lili Fini Zanuck
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Jason Patric, Sam Elliott, Max Perlich,
      Gregg Allman, Tomy Frank, William Sadler, Special K. McCray
     Undercover narcotics cop Jason Patric has to take on a partner.  He
picks new cadet Jennifer Jason Leigh.  They are put out on the streets
to catch drug dealer Gregg Allman.  While investigating, they find
themselves becoming addicted to drugs.
     I was going to see RUSH in the theaters the weekend it opened, but
it opened the same weekend as THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.  I went to
see that instead and was going to see RUSH the next weekend.  The next
weekend RUSH had already closed so now I have seen it on video and
because of the lack of reviews on it when it came out, I decided to
write one.  RUSH is the best narcotics film that I have seen since
DRUGSTORE COWBOY.  On a scale of zero to five, I give the film a five.
RUSH is rated R for explicit language, adult situations, and graphic
violence.
     The acting in the film is great.  Jennifer Jason Leigh gives one of
her best performances in her career.  Jason Patric does a much better
job than usual.  His acting could have been improved a little, but he
still did a great job.  Max Perlich's character I liked least in the
film, but it was not because of Perlich's acting, it was just the
character.  This film is not heavy on action at all, it is mostly drama
(which is misleading from some of the advertisements for the film, so be
forewarned).
     The story is written extremely well.  It kept my interest
throughout and didn't fall into many Hollywood cliches (although there
was a slight problem at the ending in this respect).  The film shows the
gritty downside to being a undercover narcotics officer, and because of
how well it does this, it makes the film excellent viewing.  I think the
thing that drowned this film at the box office was that it is not a
traditional Hollywood film, so it wasn't able to find the audience that
it needed.  It also most likely got left in the dust with films like THE
HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE and BASIC INSTINCT out.  Now that it is on
video I think that it will find the audience that it deserves.
     If you have not yet seen this film, I strongly urge you to rent it.
It is definitely worth what ever price you pay and will provide you with
almost two hours of pure enjoyment (but be prepared to be sad in some
parts).
