Title
Review for Presumed Innocent (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A tightly plotted mystery that often
     threatens to leave loose ends and them very cleverly ties
     them all together.  Harrison Ford again plays a cipher the
     audience is not intended to understand (but how many more
     such roles can he find?).  Recommended for Agatha Christie
     fans.  Rating: high +2.
     At the risk of starting this review with a (very mild) spoiler, I
will say that not until the final seconds of this film does one
recognize what a clever and well-constructed plot this film really has.
In the tradition of the best of Agatha Christie a tight and complex knot
comes apart with one deceptively simple tug.  The story of PRESUMED
INNOCENT is not told in an Agatha Christie storybook style at all.
Instead it is told with a harder and more realistic edge.  The backdrop
is the highly politicized office of the Prosecuting Attorney.  Harrison
Ford plays Rusty Sabich, an assistant to the Prosecuting Attorney
investigating the rape-murder of an attractive and ambitious co-worker.
But his investigation is cut short by a political reversal that not only
leaves the investigation in another Prosecutor's hands, but also leaves
Rusty the prime suspect for the crime.
     The one dramatic problem with the film is that the audience is
intentionally placed outside the action.  Through the whole film, much
more than is necessary or even realistic, Rusty Sabich is an enigma.
The audience is desperate to hear his side of the accusation, but
frustratingly it is kept from us.  We get details about Sabich about as
frequently and easily as the rival prosecutor does.  And matters are not
helped by having Harrison Ford in the role.  Ford plays the role
extremely blandly and woodenly.  Even as a man going through some
serious crises, it is very hard to believe Ford as a successful attorney
and assistant to the Prosecutor.
     Alan Pakula directed PRESUMED INNOCENT from a script that is very
tightly written by Frank Pierson and Pakula.  It builds its view of what
actually happened a bit at a time, with a very slow, painstaking
introduction of clues, much like Pakula's ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN.
Brian Dennehy plays the Chief Prosecutor Raymond Horgan and honkers down
in his role with his usual apparent ease.  Raul Julia plays Sabich's
attorney as just a bit dishonest.  Bonnie Bedelia plays Rusty's wife and
Greta Scaachi plays the victim whom we see a lot considering her short
screen time.
     PRESUMED INNOCENT is a real attention-holder that is solid plot and
no filler.  I rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
