Title
Review for People Under the Stairs, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is not a review--it is a symposium of ideas about THE PEOPLE UNDER
THE STAIRS based on an after-film discussion.  It will contain spoilers in
the same sense that a road sign that says "Bridge Out" is a  spoiler.
   - Kate Pott, acknowledged film viewer, cautions us that it really would
     be unfair on the basis of one psychotic cannibal film to condemn all
     the psychotic cannibal films being made and that many are considerably
     better than THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS.
   - I think it somewhat politically simplistic for this film to suggest
     that there is sufficient money in the black ghetto for everyone to have
     a high standard of living, but that the money is all going to killer
     psychotic slumlords who, through inbreeding, have become crazy as
     bedbugs.  Even if you accepted that premise, I am not sure that their
     dementia would take the form of kidnapping children for their own and
     then, when the children become unhappy, imprisoning them in the walls
     of a house.
   - Evelyn Leeper points out that this house that appears small on the
     outside would not have walls three to four feet thick.  Much of this
     film takes place within the walls of the house and we can see the
     inside of the walls are excessively spacious.
   - Evelyn pointed out that door-to-door salesmen are a much rarer
     phenomenon than they used to be.  The few salesmen who came to the door
     could not be rendered into sufficient meat to feed the twelve growing
     children living in the walls of the house.
   - I would add that if so many door-to-door salesmen have disappeared it
     would be fairly easy for the police to pinpoint the trouble spot in the
     neighborhood.
   - I was less than pleased with a plot structure in which all but about
     ten minutes of screen time is taken up by two over-extended chases
     through the walls, basement, and roof of a single house.
   - Evelyn was not totally pleased with plot elements like having the
     African-American boy who is the main character mostly trying to earn
     enough money for a cancer operation to save his mother's life (and
     wanting to become a doctor someday) and getting advice from his kindly
     uncle Booker and his somewhat shady friend Leroy.
   - I found that in spite of the fact that our main character has found
     rooms full of money wrested from ghetto tenants, it seems unlikely that
     the explosions at the end of the film would shower only money on the
     neighbors waiting outside.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Brandon Adams's family is being evicted from their ghetto apartment
by the cruel landlord because they are three days late on the rent
payment.  Adams and two other older boys, to get the money for the rent,
plan to rob the landlord's house.  They go and case the house and one of
the boys goes in to get a layout of any alarm systems.  When he does not
come out and the landlord leaves the house, they suspect him of trying
to steal all the money for himself.  They break into the house to find
him and find that they are trapped by the house, and those who lurk in
it.
     THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS is rated R for explicit language and
graphic violence.  I give the film a five on a zero to five scale.  THE
PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS is a definite must see for any fan of horror or
any fan of Wes Craven's work while it is still in the theaters.  I
recommend the film at full price.
     Being a big fan of Wes Craven's work I rushed out to the theater to
see THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS.  Wes Craven is the director of great
horror works such as DEADLY BLESSING a horror film about a girl that is
being terrorized by a religious group, THE SERPENT & THE RAINBOW a
voodoo horror film, SHOCKER a horror film about a man who was killed and
can travel through television sets and kill people, a television film
called CHILLER about a man who was cryogenically frozen who defreezes
and starts killing people, the now famous original A NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET film, and many others.  Each of Wes Craven's works are unique and
this one is no different.
     Craven's films, instead of being slasher films, have substance to
them.  I'm not saying that I dislike slasher films, I'm just saying that
Craven's films are different than most of the "modern horror films."
THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS does have graphic violence, but the main
point of the film is not to see how many people can be slaughtered; the
emphasis is more on the actual scare factor.  So, I recommend THE PEOPLE
UNDER THE STAIRS to anyone who wishes to see a good horror film but does
not like slasher films.  Like some of Wes Craven's work--excluding
SHOCKER, A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, DEADLY FRIEND, and SWAMP THING--THE
PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS could possibly happen, which makes the movie all
the better.
     THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS, like most films, will lose some of its
impact when seen on a small screen television.  The special effects in
the film are very well done.  The house has a sinister look to it even
in the daytime.  Did anyone else who saw the film notice that the house
has the same basic floor plan of Freddy's house from A NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET?   The actors all put in good performances.  In a horror film
most people think that how good the actor's performance is has nothing
to do with the quality of the horror film, but it does.  If an actor
doesn't believe what he's acting then the people watching the film will
never believe it either.  So often, to save money, the actors in a
horror film have no ability which, in my opinion, harms the finished
product.  However, even though the cast of this film was mostly unknown
to me, the actors in the film have real ability.  The only actor in the
film that I recognized was Kelly Jo Minter.  I have seen her in films
like HOUSE PARTY, NEW JACK CITY, A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 5: THE DREAM
CHILD, and POPCORN.

Author
The Phantom (The Phantom)
     The Phantom missed the opening titles for THE PEOPLE UNDER THE
STAIRS, Wes Craven's latest horror film -- he was under the impression
that it took less than 30 minutes to get from lower Manhattan to
midtown, an impression the New York City Transit Authority apparently
doesn't share -- so he doesn't know how good they were.  Perhaps they
were clever; perhaps they were scary; perhaps they leaped onto the
screen from under a staircase.  The Phantom just doesn't know, since he
arrived just a few moments too late to catch them.  He sincerely hopes
that they were good, however, since most of the rest of the film (which
he did not, unfortunately, arrive too late to miss) ranged from bad to
awful; from dopey to imbecilic; from silly to sorry.
     Simply put, PEOPLE is a mess.  Worse still, it's Wes' mess -- all
of it.  Though one can look at the last few scenes of EXORCIST III and
see the meddling hand of nervous studio executives -- people who felt
that if William Friedkin's excellent and very literate film didn't have
at least one gory exorcism, no one would go see it -- it's quite obvious
that PEOPLE was Wes' baby from first reel to last.
     It's hard to say what was going through Craven's mind when he set
out to make this film.  Although it's possible to make a horror film
that also works as a comedy, it's not an easy task, and the result is
rarely successful as either a horror film or a comedy.  Sam Raimi's EVIL
DEAD 2 did succeed in this, but it also had the luxury of having a
successful horror film -- the original EVIL DEAD -- to satirize.  On the
other hand, consider the abominable sequel to THE TEXAS CHAINSAW
MASSACRE.  Here again, director Tobe Hooper had the opportunity to
satirize the classic original, but the result was as close to a complete
failure as is imaginable.  TCM II worked neither as a horror film nor as
a comedy, though it did manage to make those who saw it feel profoundly
sorry for everyone involved in the production.  That kind of sympathy
isn't easy to elicit, and Hooper should be given some credit for getting
whole theaters full of people to blush and turn their heads away in
embarrassment.  It's an achievement that's not perhaps on the same level
as getting whole theaters full of people to laugh or cringe with terror,
but it's an achievement nonetheless.
     Unfortunately, getting whole theaters full of people to scratch
their heads, turn to their companions, and wonder aloud how such a
terrible film could ever have been made is not the way to establish
yourself as one of the masters of cinematic horror.  Although Craven has
had far more successes than has Tobe Hooper (whose goofy, nearly
nonsensical LIFEFORCE came to mind at several points during the
ludicrous goings on in Craven's film), he's also been rather uneven; for
every HILLS HAVE EYES and NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, we seem to get an
equal number of films like SHOCKER, DEADLY BLESSING, DEADLY FRIEND
(which Leonard Maltin claims is the only movie ever made in which
someone is beheaded by a basketball) and his latest, THE PEOPLE UNDER
THE STAIRS.
     At his best and when working with a strong story, Wes Craven is
able to fashion small, self-contained worlds of terror, in which
ordinary people get caught up in extraordinary events.  His camera work,
sense of pacing, and visual flair are strikingly good -- especially in a
genre that provides employment to so many untalented hacks -- and even
films as dumb as SHOCKER or as bad as THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS look
terrific.  His films all have a rich, colorful texture that's rarely
seen in the generally flat and uninteresting horror product churned out
of Hollywood with dismaying regularity these days.  Oftentimes the way a
film looks and "feels" is as important as what's actually going on
onscreen; after all, David Lynch's classic ERASERHEAD manages to unnerve
nearly everyone who sees it, even though very very little actually
happens.  Sam Raimi's unsteady camera work and grainy film stock helped
make the audience for THE EVIL DEAD feel that things in that film were
somewhat out of control, and that Raimi wasn't going to feel bound by
the traditional agreement between directors and their audiences: that no
matter how gruesome or disturbing individual scenes may get, the film
will soon return to normality and another seven or eight minutes of
pointless dialogue and exposition.
     Alas, Craven's latest film looks great but feels like a week in bed
with the flu.  It may just be coincidence, but by the end of THE PEOPLE
UNDER THE STAIRS, the Phantom was feeling decidedly under the weather,
and since then he seems to be unable to shake a nagging headache and
occasional chills (notably absent during the film).  It could, of
course, be winter's first cold; on the other hand, it could also be the
first outward manifestation of the horror malaise that the Phantom has
been in the grip of since he saw CHILD'S PLAY 3 -- certainly none of the
horror films the Phantom has seen since had to work too hard to generate
headaches and occasional drowsiness.  Call it Chronic Disappointment
Syndrome, if you will.  The Phantom plans on taking some extra vitamin C
and staying in bed until CAPE FEAR opens next week, on the assumption
that Dr. Scorsese and his able assistant Dr. DeNiro will have a cure.
     There's a fundamental conceptual problem at the heart of THE PEOPLE
UNDER THE STAIRS: the notion that a crazy, sadistic couple could trap
and keep dozens of teenage boys in their basement, feed them with table
scraps and bits of the mailman, deprive each of them of their freedom,
their dignity and their humanity, and then have them just *live* there
and in the walls of their home like overgrown, bipedal rats, really puts
rather a strain on our credulity.  Oh, sure, they do give the boys
flashlights and a generous supply of replacement batteries -- and
goodness knows, that alone would keep the Phantom in someone's basement
for at least a week or two -- but after a few minutes, when we realize
that Craven doesn't intend these boys to be spirits or vampires or pets,
and that he really intends for us to buy this loopy premise, it becomes
painfully obvious that Craven won't be able to stop THE PEOPLE UNDER THE
STAIRS from turning into first a comedy of the absurd and then a
travesty of the inane.
     Even if we put aside the film's obvious logical flaws -- the
enormous and rather unlikely amount of space between the walls of the
house; the apparently huge interior of what from the outside appears to
be a very modest sized home; the football field-sized basement; the
ability of a small boy repeatedly to get in and out of a house from
which twenty or so other boys apparently cannot escape -- there's too
much about THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS that just doesn't make sense.
Why throw in the interminable nonsense about this couple being slumlords
who apparently own half the buildings in the "ghetto"?  What difference
does it make if the little boy and his family are going to be evicted?
Can Craven possibly believe that anyone in the audience actually cares
about these cardboard people?  The film spends a lot of time explaining
who this crazy couple is and what they're doing to the good folks in the
"ghetto", but to what end?  After all, it's likely that presenting these
people as child abusers and cannibals would be enough to get the
audience clamoring for their demise -- making them landlords on top of
everything else will certainly help whip the audience into a frenzy of
hatred, but it will likely do so at the expense of the story's suspense.
As is always the case with horror, too much explanation spoils the
broth, and with THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS, Craven makes the very
mistake he so neatly avoided in A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET and THE HILLS
HAVE EYES: he spends much too long trying to explain who these people
are and why they're doing what they're doing.  No one really needed to
know Freddy's whole sordid history -- a few hints sufficed -- and
goodness knows the freakish family in the HILLS didn't require any
explanation at all.  The action and the terror spoke for themselves.
     But in THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS, Craven seems to have decided to
make a very nasty "movie of the week"; to that end, he apparently
further decided that his audience wouldn't be able to accept the rather
unlikely premise of the film if he didn't devote 30 minutes to the
after-school special-like story-within-a-story about the poor but brave
little black boy and his poor but deserving family.  Had this 30 minutes
all been concentrated at the beginning of the film, perhaps the Phantom
could advise his phans to arrive a half-hour late; alas, Craven has
carefully placed stop signs throughout his film so that whenever the
action or horror threatens to get too intense or the audience too
involved with the film, the plot quickly calls for another few minutes
of talk, talk, talk.  Phans who see this sad excuse for a horror film
are advised to rent the original ELM STREET film and view it with this
in mind -- they may be surprised and saddened to see how tightly focused
that film was, how little of the film's time and plot is wasted on
needless exposition, and how much more frightening Freddy is because the
film forgoes having a plot that does not directly involve him.  When
we're not with the kids in their dreams, we're in the real world where
all their efforts to get an adult to believe them fall on deaf ears.
The more they fail and the more Freddy succeeds at wiping out the entire
group of Elm Street kids, the more the suspense and terror in the film
builds; sadly, this is in marked contrast to the pacing and plot of THE
PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS, which limp along to an extremely phony climax
long after everyone in the audience has lost interest.
     This is not to say that a horror film can't having all the
trappings of a "movie of the week"; after all, THE STEPFATHER is an
excellent example of how a filmmaker can logically extend the endless
"brother against brother", "father against son", "mother against
daughter", "father against mother" movie "specials" that fill the
networks' after-dinner schedules.  But it's not a simple thing to do,
and a filmmaker who sets out to create a film like THE STEPFATHER would
be well-advised to heed the reasons that that film was a success:
excellent acting; a thoughtful script; and tight direction -- three of
the things that THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS unfortunately lacks.
     Horror films with unlikely premises can certainly succeed, and if
more care had been taken with THE PEOPLE UNDER THE STAIRS, it's unlikely
that anyone would notice or criticize its many logical flaws.  But since
the film is so badly done, so ineptly plotted, and so filled with scene
after scene of people talking, talking, talking, none of it works, and
the film's many flaws become all too apparent.  You know you've seen a
good horror film when you don't begin to wonder why the people in the
film did all the crazy, dangerous things they did until long after the
film has ended; likewise, you know you've seen a bad horror film when
you start wondering that almost before the first killing.  Let's just
say that the Phantom spent so much of his time during the film wondering
why nothing made any sense that by the time it was over he'd all but
forgotten how promising the film seemed as the opening credits rolled.
     Phans are well advised to steer clear of this turkey and hope that
Wes Craven will do something to make up for it with his next film.  One
bright note until then: no one need worry about THE PEOPLE UNDER THE
STAIRS II.
