Title
Review for Decoy (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Italian visual effects expert Carlo Rambaldi is always going
to be remembered for various impressive bad guys he had
helped create for films like KING KONG or ALIEN. When he was
executive producer for DECOY, Canadian 1995 action thriller
directed by Victor Rambaldi, the result was something which
was only bad and hardly the stuff he is going to be
remembered for.
Plot of this film deals with Travis (played by Robert
Patrick) and Baxter (played by Peter Weller), two superbly
trained mercenaries who used to work together and who are
about to be teamed up again. Reason for that is their former
employer who had obtained a revolutionary new chip. The
competition has learned about that and they start making
treats demanding chip for themselves. So, Travis and Baxter
are hired to protect his daughter. The job is not so simple
because it turns out that the opposition too is made of
dedicated, superbly trained and well-armed professionals.
Cynics would say that Peter Weller and Robert Patrick seem
like an excellent choice for the roles of mercenaries
because they played killing machines in their best known
films (ROBOCOP, TERMINATOR 2). Author of this review tends
to agree with that, but their presence alone is not enough
to save DECOY from well-deserved road to "straight-to-
video" oblivion. Everything else is a complete mess - the
plot is incoherent, the action scenes look terrible, so in
the end DECOY sinks bellow the standards, which are lowest,
even for B movies. The only thing that is relatively
pleasing to the eye is the use of Saskatchewan locations but
the viewers might do themselves a great service if they
watch some documentary instead of this.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
