Title
Review for Hidden, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Berge Garabedian
One of Kyle McLachlan's earlier cinematic features, this movie has had
an obvious influence on such films as THE TERMINATOR (8/10), SPECIES
(7/10) and the more recent, FALLEN with Denzel Washington.
PLOT:
A science-fiction picture set in modern times, this thriller follows
the exploits of an "entity" from outer space, who likes to inhabit
human bodies, use them up until they are completely worn out, and then
switch over to the next available receptacle. FBI agent (McLachlan) and
local top cop (Nouri) are charged with the capture of this "thing"
before it's too late.
CRITIQUE:
This fast-paced, urban equivalent of THE THING (8/10), checks in on all
cylinders for ultra-violence (God knows how many people died in this
movie), action and an overall rock 'n roll attitude. Then again, how
can you go wrong with an "alien" that likes the Ferraris, guns, heavy
metal music and sexy girls ?! Granted, the plot isn't the most
elaborate of tales (alien bad, find alien, kill alien), but I can
honestly say that I was never once bored during the viewing of this
entire picture.
I wouldn't recommend it to those who don't like car chases, murders,
and bland acting, but for all the rest of you out there, those who
enjoy putting away their brains every now and again, sitting back,
slamming back some salsa'd nachos, and relishing in the cheeze some
call film... have a blast !! 
Two scenes to watch for are both within the first ten minutes of this
gore-fest. The opening sequence is one of the most rockin' scenes to
open any action movie, and the subsequent extra-terrestrial
"transformation" is another eye-catcher. Even the late 80's special
effects were okay. Followed by THE HIDDEN II in 1994.
Little Known Facts:  
This film was Kyle MacLachlan's first non-David Lynch foray into the
world of feature films. His first two movie appearances were in Lynch's
wretched DUNE (4/10) and the sensational BLUE VELVET (8.5/10)

Author
Shane Burridge
In what could almost be a pedigree of his TWIN PEAKS role as FBI agent
Dale Cooper, Kyle MacLachlan plays an otherworldly FBI agent in search
of a psychotic killer on the loose in L.A.  He teams up with local
detective Michael Nouri after the killer has been cut down in a police
shootout and tries to convince him that their problems are far from
over.  As we quickly discover, the real killer is an alien parasite
that moves from body to body, rendering it nearly impossible to find. 
The good news is that almost immediately the new host exhibits
telltale behavior patterns, revealing the true nature of the alien
hidden within it.  The bad news is that these signs usually include
car theft, bank robbery, and homicide.  
Look at THE HIDDEN one way and it's almost a 50s Juvenile Delinquency
picture - the notion of alien-as-hedonist incorporates the same
elements used to drive a wedge between the cinematic generation gap of
that time: sex, fast cars, loud rock music, destruction of property,
and living like there's no tomorrow.  But even though all of the
alien's incarnations commit acts of casual violence the strange
overall impression is not so much that it is wrong to steal or kill
but that in a civilized society it is simply wrong to do whatever you
feel like.  Just to confuse the matter, the alien chooses middle-aged
subjects for its hosts (I suppose in some cases it doesn't have much
choice).  Was this because the portrayal of younger people going on a
shooting rampage was too uncomfortably close to reality?  It would
have at least drawn attention to the J.D. motifs in the film.  I'll
concede that it's the juxtaposition of the hosts' appearances against
their repugnant activities that provides much of the film's humor. 
Especially effective is the alien's second host body (William Boyett)
whose monosyllabic delivery, beady eyes and tight-lipped expression
make him both amusing and unsettling.  It's useful that Boyett gets
more screen time than the other incarnations because it gives us a
chance to compare him with the much more sedate (but equally elusive)
MacLachlan.
Film manages to make the old alien-parasite routine look fresh thanks
to great pacing that doesn't let up from the opening car chase
(exciting on a big screen), but thinking over the storyline and
script, you'll realize that this could have been a terrible film.  As
it turns out, Bob Hunt's script is served well by good acting, fine
cinematography, great effects, and energetic direction (by Jack
Sholder).  It's one of the few B-movies you'll see with an A budget -
don't  tell me that any film that totals a Porsche in the first scene
has a B-grade budget!  The ending, although strangely neutral (it's
neither totally satisfying nor unsatisfying) suggests in the final
shot that a whole new, different story is just beginning.  I'm glad
they left it up to our imaginations instead of churning out HIDDEN II.
