Title
Review for Splitting Heirs (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's a case of two babies switched at birth.  Tommy (Eric Idle),
really a duke, has been growing up as one of many children in an Indian
household in London.  Henry (Rick Moranis), really the son of a cook,
has been accepted for years as the legitimate heir to the dukedom.
When Tommy discovers that he is actually the heir, he begins to scheme
how to assume his rightful position.  With the help of an unethical
lawyer named Shadgrind (John Cleese), Tommy plots to assassinate Henry
and take his place.  After Tommy proves to be an inept killer,
Shadgrind decides to take matters into his own hands, but his attempts
prove little more successful.
     Without a doubt, John Cleese is one of the modern masters of
comedy.  In addition to his large body of MONTY PYTHON work and the
riotously funny television series FAWLTY TOWERS, Cleese turned in a
terrific performance in the little-known Clockwise and was the creative
force behind A FISH CALLED WANDA.  His presence in SPLITTING HEIRS
all-but-guaranteed a film of some quality.  Or so I thought before
seeing it.
     SPLITTING HEIRS manages to utterly fail in spite of Cleese's
presence.  Actually, although his presence has been heavily promoted,
John's performance is little more than a cameo--at most, his screen
time totals ten minutes.  Like in ERIC THE VIKING, the scenes in which
Cleese is featured have a degree of life and humor, but most of the
rest of the production is in need of resuscitation.
     Sadly, Eric Idle, another of the Pythons, is part of the problem.
He is not the same comedian that he was twenty-five years ago--or even
ten years ago.  Those who have enjoyed his recent, banal projects will
likely enjoy SPLITTING HEIRS.  The humor, while not in the same vein as
the awful NUNS ON THE RUN, is definitely on the same level--juvenile,
stupid, and frequently unfunny.  The script is insulting to the
intelligence.  Too often, this movie plays like a run-of-the-mill
television sitcom.  Little, if anything, of the unique brand of mayhem
that made MONTY PYTHON so enjoyable, exists in SPLITTING HEIRS.  This
is BLAME IT ON THE BELLBOY with John Cleese--cat food garnished with
caviar.
     Since LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, Rick Moranis has been drifting
listlessly from role to role, rarely eliciting more than an occasional
laugh in any given film.  SPLITTING HEIRS will do nothing to reverse
that trend.  From start to finish, he is flat, and Idle isn't much
better.  At least Barbara Hershey enjoys a rare chance to go
over-the-top.
     Most of the laugh-generating scenes involve Cleese.  Had his role
in the movie been enlarged, the production might have been less
tedious, but such a boon to the audience was not to be.  Eric Idle, who
wrote, executive produced, co-starred in, and sung a couple of songs
for this movie, has to bear the brunt of the responsibility.  Anyone
contemplating going to see SPLITTING HEIRS would do better to watch
some old PYTHON re-runs and wait for John Cleese's next film.
Hopefully next time he'll be involved in something less ugly and more
innovative.
Note:  in response to some requests, all movie reviews written by me may
       be reprinted provided that they carry the following notification:
       "Copyright 1993 by James Berardinelli".
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
