Title
Review for East Side Story (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Seth Bookey
(Germany, 1997, in German, Russian, Czeck and Rumanian with English Subtitles)
  Seen on 29 June 1997 for $8 with Tony at the Film Forum. I arrived late, but
  missed about two minutes of the film.
   This is the documentary that asks the question "Who knows how things
   could have turned out if Socialism had just been more fun?" It was
   discovered that one film could do more for propaganda than political
   meetings, especially if you had a clear minority of the population
   attending agitation rallies. But everyone loves the movies and wants
   to be entertained, especially if you have been waiting all day on line
   for state-sponsored toilet paper at GUM. Apparently, only 40 musicals
   were made behind the Iron Curtain, and very often the only role models
   they had were the "traumfabrik" of Hollywood. Happiness was a
   universal theme in both the East and the West.
   The Soviets discovered early on what an important tool they had in the
   cinema, and even Stalin himself was persuaded to allow the making of
   musicals. One, Grigori Alexandrov's Volga Volga, was his favorite--he
   viewed it more than 100 times and made a gift of it to FDR during the
   war. Unfortunately, while the actors since "our happiness is blooming
   like the wheat" the infamous purges ravaged Russia in general and
   Russian movie houses in particular. At least the survivors liked it.
   After the war, the countries that had socialism thrust upon them
   continued to make movies, but under difficult circumstances. Censors
   worked against them while they labored under shortages of essentials,
   like money and electricity. Directors like Grigori Alexandrov played
   the fool, like the Roman Emperor Claudius, to survive the political
   perils of the communist regimes. The musicals proved successful in
   many of the Eastern Bloc countries, but they were few and far between.
   The documentary succeeds; it shows a lot of clips while speaking to a
   variety of people involved in Eastern Bloc musicals--cast members,
   writers, and even audience members. We even get to meet the "Doris Day
   of the East" and the "Elvis of the East." Actually, they were more
   like East Germany's answer to Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello.
   The musicals themselves are as good, bad, memorable, forgettable,
   clever or stupid as anything made here. Hot Summer was made the same
   year as My Fair Lady and surpassed its Western competition at the box
   office, sending throngs of East German teens to the theaters, to the
   record stores, and to the North Sea for beach vacations. At one point,
   a Russian woman notes that sometimes, holding onto some basic untruths
   is essential "just to survive," and it is not too difficult to imagine
   why the masses didn't mind seeing the screen tell them that prosperity
   and a wide variety of consumer goods were just around the corner.
   _________________________________________________________________
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Kristian M Lin
        If it's playing in your area, you won't do any better for goofy,
surreal fun than "East Side Story," a documentary about musical films made
in Eastern Europe between 1934 and 1973.  Filled with hilarity both
intentional and unintentional, this wacky movie is "That's Entertainment!'
for the Warsaw Pact set.
        Directed by Dana Ranga and co-written by Ranga and Andrew Horn,
"East Side Story" intersperses clips of these movie rarities with
interviews of film historians, filmmakers, actors and audience members
familiar with them.  The interviews illustrate the film's thesis, which is
that moviemakers who tried to make musicals in the Communist system were
in an impossible bind.  Audiences loved these movies for the simple
pleasures of song, dance, and comedy.  The apparatchiks knew that the
masses had to be entertained, but musicals were threatening - they were
too frivolous, and their visual opulence glorified materialism.  The
bureaucrats vastly preferred that people see serious films about history
and social issues (one viewer describes attending these as "like a
national duty").
        It was hard to obtain official sanction to make a musical, and the
studios never saw the profits from the hits, so why bother?  This dilemma
even inspired one of the genre's biggest successes, a 1962 East German
entry called "Midnight Revue."  In it, a movie producer is so frustrated
in his attempts to film a musical that he kidnaps the country's leading
film director, scriptwriter, and composer, and holds them until they come
up with an idea for one.  The three men insist that it can't be done and,
naturally, burst into song and dance about the impossibility of making
musicals.
        With Hollywood musicals largely verboten in the Eastern bloc,
directors and performers had to learn the genre's ins and outs as they
went along.  Yet the film clips we see reveal a high level of singing and
dancing talent, and the visual elements have a real deftness and style
that wouldn't have embarrassed any Hollywood director.
        Nevertheless, you'll find it hard to believe much of what you see
(and hear, if you know German, Russian, or Czech).  That's because the
musical's generic conventions clashed with the dictates of socialist
aesthetics.  As the dryly funny narration explains, "Godard once said that
the history of film was the history of boys photographing girls.  But
Stalin had a different fantasy: boys photographing tractors."
        Thus, song lyrics like "Racka dacka, racka dacka, that's the song
of the coal press!"  Beaming, rosy-cheeked Russian field workers sing,
"Harvest, harvest, keep loading!  The quota has been attained!"  A couple
of Czech beauty parlor attendants harmonize, "No woman at a construction
site is thinking of her skin," while young women lying on massage tables
do choreographed routines and the masseuses pat them down in time to the
music.
        Of course, there's a dark subtext to this Communist musical
delirium.  Joseph Stalin's favorite movie was a musical called "Volga,
Volga."  Looking at that rollicking farce about singing boatmen, you'd
never guess that it was made during the worst period of Stalin's genocidal
campaign to remove potential enemies.  Perhaps, "East Side Story" 
suggests, finding something to sing and dance about in those dark times
was a sort of heroism.
        But the movie doesn't sell this too hard.  Instead, it uses
musicals to point up the socialists' failure to see how providing
consumers with entertainment (like the damned capitalist countries did)
could have served their own best interests.  One hysterical insight comes
from an East German sociology professor who sent his assistants to scour
Lenin's 38 volumes of collected writings to find what he wrote about
entertainment.  The answer: absolutely nothing.  As the narrator says,
"Who knows how things might have turned out if socialism had just been
more fun?"
