Title
Review for Stella polaris (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     A woman lies in a hospital bed and remembers her childhood in a
fishing village in northern Noway.  It is not clear why she is in
hospital--perhaps she has been in a car accident--and she may even be
two different women (mother and daughter?) at two different times.  She
drifts through the landscapes of memory like a ghost, sometimes seeing
her village deserted, abandoned, empty; sometimes seeing it peopled by
her younger self (or her daughter?) and the people she knew.
     The film chronicles her youth without words, almost without plot,
using images and music only.  It has a lot of the feel of a
documentary--we see Germany occupying Noway in the second world war and
burning the village to the ground when they leave; we see the villagers
returning after the war to rebuild; we see the traditional fishing
industry of small boats (with wives tying hooks and gutting fish) being
replaced by fish factories and larger, more dangerous trawlers.
     This material is rendered out of order in flashback and intercut
with real documentary film (and sequences in black and white pretending
to be real documentary film) and it is often hard to make sense of,
especially with the ambiguities over the role(s) of the central
character.  The result is a film that manages to create an atmosphere
of timeless people and landscape enduring through a changing society,
but which loses out on character.  I found it hard work, but others may
be able to relax into the dreamy feel of the fjords and enjoy.
