Title
Review for Fire in the Sky (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     FIRE IN THE SKY purports to document the events surrounding the
supposed abduction of Travis Walton (D. B. Sweeney) by aliens.  The
film follows the day leading up to Walton's disappearance, the
"mysterious" fire-like glow that draws him from the safety of his
truck, and the "experiments" performed on him by the vaguely-humanoid
aliens he claims to have been kidnapped by.  The film also makes an
attempt to chronicle the lives of the five lumberjacks who witness the
abduction and become prime suspects in a murder investigation opened by
an ambitious and cynical police officer (James Garner).
     Put simply, FIRE IN THE SKY is a muddled-up mess.  It can't make
up its mind whether it wants to be horror, drama, or science-fiction.
As a result, it ends up being ineffective as any of the three.  Writer
Tracy Torme has penned a script that is poorly-paced and
badly-motivated.  The film meanders in all directions, with characters
introduced and dropped, potentially intriguing plot elements buried,
dialogue that's embarrassing to listen to, and characters that a
sixth-grader could have fleshed out more effectively.  Very little is
effectively brought together or resolved by the end of the one-hundred
ten-minute ordeal that the audience is subjected to.
     It's clear that the sympathy of the movie is with Travis Walton.
We are meant to believe that he was kidnapped and tortured by aliens.
This makes the presence of James Garner's character somewhat
mystifying.  Initially, I thought he was there to represent the "other
side of the story," but his position is never allowed to become even
slightly credible.  He is the heavy, refusing to believe Walton and his
friends despite the overwhelming evidence supporting their version of
events.  Given the film's obvious leanings, spending so much time with
Garner's police officer is a waste of time.
     This has to be one of the most grim films of recent memory.  I'm
not sure why director Robert Lieberman chose to fashion his movie like
this, but the result is almost painful--dark, gloomy settings with
harshly unpleasant characters and no sign of anything remotely
resembling comic relief.  Not only would I not want to meet any of the
people in this movie, but they are so unsympathetic that it becomes
grueling to sit through nearly two hours of their lives on screen.
     There is one chillingly effective sequence in FIRE IN THE SKY and,
more than anything else, it illustrates that there could have been a
decent story here.  Walton's "experiences" in the alien vessel are
portrayed with stunning, gut-wrenching realism (a couple members of
the audience walked out during this sequence of the film--it's that
disturbing).  Much of the credit for these scenes goes to actor D. B.
Sweeney.  This is his only opportunity in the film to act.  In fact,
not only is it his only chance, it's the only chance for any member of
the cast.
     Most unfortunate of all is the ending, which left me asking the
question: "Who cares?"  This is deadly for any film, especially one
that pretends to probe the deep issues that FIRE IN THE SKY claims to.
The film states that it is based on a true story, but about the only
truth apparent to me was that this misbegotten attempt at a fictional
re-creation should have been killed before anyone purchased the first
reel of film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
