Title
Review for Late for Dinner (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     LATE FOR DINNER is a film by W. D. Richter, written by Mark
Andrus, starring Brian Wimmer, Peter Berg, Marcia Gay Harden, and
Colleen Flynn.
     (Very minor *spoilers* follow, since I have to assume the premise of
this film is unknown to the majority of you.  It suddenly appeared in
Seattle without any advance word, as far as I know.)
     W. D. Richter was the director of BUCKAROO BANZAI (1984).  And in
its way, LATE FOR DINNER is just as odd, idiosyncratic, and surprising.
It is also half BACK TO THE FUTURE and half GHOST, with a touches of
BLADERUNNER thrown in for the hell of it.  This is a film about time
travel through hibernation, a theme at least as old as the novel LOOKING
BACKWARD, which was published in 1888; chances are one or more of you
will write me or post an even older example.  But LATE TO DINNER works
here, freshly and touchingly.
     Frank, played by Peter Berg, is our narrator, and, typically of
Richter, we get to see the entire movie through the eyes and perceptions
of someone who was brain-damaged at birth and left with the IQ of a
small child.  
     He and his brother-in-law, Willie, played by Brian Wimmer (who I
understand had a role on the TV series CHINA BEACH), get into some deep
trouble in 1962 in Santa Fe, are aided in his own way by a slightly mad,
or at least off-center, cryonics researcher, and who are accidentally
and impossibly reanimated in 1991 in Pomona.
     Wimmer is the heart of the movie, which depends for its success on
the success of his performance.  He succeeds beautifully.  I've never
seen CHINA BEACH, so I'm unfamiliar with his acting.  Here he's a kind,
sensitive, country boy, with slightly antiquated manners, but a
willingness to think the best of every situation.  He is a romantic and
a family man.  He not only is his wife's lover, but he is also the
utterly devoted father of his child.  His greatest loss is the loss of
decades with the two women he loves the most.  He speaks with a charming
down-home accent that makes him the personification of sincerity itself.
     The first half of the movie is the set-up, including a flash-back,
and the BTTF future shock of encountering 1991 without having the chance
to ease into it like the rest of us.  Richter has a wonderful talent for
making our own era look like the future to us, and it is this sequence,
which has a lot of comedy in it, that we experience odd little moments
right out of BLADERUNNER (very strange, totally ignored business going
on the background of the main actions), at least for me.  But if this is
the BACK TO THE FUTURE half, it lacks the extremism and gimmicky
desperation of those films, giving us instead a much more human plight,
even in a fantasy context (it's hard to remember that, as one character
remarks, "cryonics is a joke -- you can't freeze somebody like a piece
of hamburger").
     The second half is thematically and effectively quite a different
movie, the GHOST half, if you will, very romantic and not a little
weepy.  A feel good section, in which the main tension is not solving
crimes (they were solved decades before by the wife) but rather whether
the two lovers can bridge the missing years and get back together.
     It's this second half, particularly, which stands LATE FOR DINNER a
chance of being another spectacular sleeper success, like GHOST.  I've
seen the movie twice in one weekend and both audiences ate it up.
People were crying happily all over the auditorium.  It is sweet and
satisfying.
     And not only do we have an epic love story of sorts, but we have a
beautiful friendship between the brothers-in-law, a friendship where man
has to look out for and care for the other.  I am a sucker for this
particular story element, I have to confess.
     All the principals give first-rate performances.  The two men never
let up, as Lyndol remarked; their roles seem especially difficult and
they never lose their characters for a moment.  The two women get to
demonstrate less range -- basically they're limited to shock and denial.
Harden plays Joy, the long-abandoned wife who had to find her own way to
the Nineties; Flynn plays Jessica, the grown daughter, who has to help
ease her father back into her and her mother's lives.
     This is an odd movie and the oddest thing about it in a way is that
it works.  It surprises us over and over even at its romantic core; it
has a easy, low-key, kind of aw-shucks sense of humor; and it was some
winning performances.

Author
Jeff Davis
     [Short precis of LATE FOR DINNER.  Two young men from 1962 on the
run from the law happen upon an experimental cryogenics lab.  They are
unwittingly frozen until an accident in 1991 awakens them.  More plot
explanation would tread close to spoilers.]
     There are so few, genuinely sweet-natured movies out there, that
it's hard to know what to say when one comes along.  For example,
GREGORY'S GIRL by Bill Forsyth.  It evaporates in front of your eyes:
Gregory plays soccer, he develops a crush on the team's only girl
player, he manages to finagle a date with her, but never quite gets
there.  End of movie.  I've recommended lots of movies to people who
come back with a "What did I just see?" reaction.  I remember one
co-worker who came back from LOCAL HERO absolutely livid.  "Nothing
happened!" he said.  He wanted me to reimburse him for his ticket.
     Add LATE FOR DINNER to the list.  We rented it Friday night and
loved it and showed it to friends after the Derby on Saturday night.
They loved it too.  When I turned it in to the video place on Saturday
the normally ersatz-Soviet lumpenprole who clerk for the video place all
wanted to know my reaction and we all felt like one of the Elect when we
confirmed our feelings for the movie.
     But there's a caveat.  There's "nothing" much there.  It is a Rip
Van Winkle story with a couple of John Steinbeck heroes grafted on to
it.  (I'm thinking of OF MICE AND MEN but any of his honest, simple
men will do.)  But, it swings throughout.  The director, W. D. Richter,
doesn't go in for any of the usual longeurs that are the stock in trade
of saccharine movies.  The action snaps from one scene to the next.
"Sweet" usually means "treacly" but LATE FOR DINNER doesn't let you
catch your breath.  He doesn't linger over the big emotional scenes, so
the 3 hanky crowd may wind up feeling cheated.  This is Sonny Rollins
playing "God Bless the Child" rather than Edith Piaf singing "La Vie en
Rose."
     Which is not to say the movie doesn't have some flaws.  For one
thing, some of the dialogue between the two male leads has a tooth-ache
RAISING ARIZONA preciosity to it.  The movie begins in 1962 and I'd be
willing to bet the screen-writer doesn't have more than a passing
familiarity with the era: the diction sometimes seems more than arch.
Abstract, is more like it.  And some of the names are too *boldly
symbolic* for words.  They have a writing workshop odor to them.  But
that soon passes and the script's self-conscious structural strategies 
actually payoff and help sustain it: the movie constantly has an 
eavesdropper lurking somewhere to take note of the heroes' dislocations:
a doctor, a waitress, a push cart vendor.  By the end of the movie, the 
audience can easily perform that function and every modern tic and bad 
habit can woosh by without having to be underlined.  
     The leads are both fine: I've never seen anyone in the movie before
except for Peter Gallagher from SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE.  Gallagher
must have the same agent as William Atherton and Charles Grodin: he
seems to be doomed to playing slime-balls.  The actor who plays Willie
Husband looks like a computer merger of Richard Gere and Alec Baldwin,
but he has a style and presence of his own.  Expect more from him in the
future.  (Sorry, I'm not a credit hound.  I don't remember his name.)
     As I've said in other posts, I don't much care for ranking movies.
I enjoyed it a lot and almost everyone that I've talked to who has seen
it has liked/loved it as well.  
