Title
Review for Tommyknockers, The (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
About nine years ago, I read the article in Serbian science
fiction fanzine that dealt with the novels written by
Stephen King. The author gave very detailed analysis of each
of them, and in the end, ranked them all. On the bottom of
the list was THE TOMMYKNOCKERS. Whether the novel was indeed
the worst or not is not important, because almost any piece
of fiction with Stephen King signiture is likely to be
adapted to the big screen. So was the case with THE
TOMMYKNOCKERS, which was adapted into three-hour TV-movie in
1993.
Like many of Stephen King's novel, the story takes place in
a small town in the Northeast. The place is called Haven,
and one of its inhabitants is a writer Bobbi Anderson
(played by Marg Helgenberger). One day she walks in the
woods and stumbles into strange metallic object. Soon Bobbi,
and the rest of the town is witnessing a series of bizzare
events, most frightening of them all being the change within
the townspeople themselves. Good, God-fearing citizens are
turning into stone cold killers, all guided by mysterious,
evil force. Due to the alcoholism, Bobbi's friend Jim
Gardner (Smits) is the only man immune to the evil influence
and he tries to stop it.
Although it has budget, and many of very capable actors in
supporting roles (including the lead Jimmy Smits in a role
rather unusual for his screen personality), THE
TOMMYKNOCKERS is a television movie that simply looks cheap.
Reason for that is formulaic screenplay by Lawrence D.
Cohen, that doesn't improve the lack of originality in
Stephen King's plot, and also the professional, yet wooden
directing by John Power. In the end, after many plot holes,
predictable twists and lot of boredom, we have rather lame
finale with some cheesy special effects. All in all, this
film is still watchable, but most people would do themselves
a favour if they skip it.
