Title
Review for Night of the Running Man (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Ever since the times of Hitchcock, many thrillers were
using, with more or less success, the formula of ordinary
people caught in extraordinary situations. NIGHT OF THE
RUNNING MAN, 1994 low-budget thriller by Mark L. Lester,
used the same concept. Its protagonist is Jerry Logan
(played by Andrew McCarthy), ordinary cab driver from Las
Vegas. One night he stumbles on the man who has just stolen
million dollars from Mafia. That money ends in his
possession, but Jerry has lived long enough in Las Vegas to
know what happens to people who had crossed Mafia. He
immediately starts planing to leave town. His fears are
quite justified, because Mafia after him sends David
Eckhardt (Scott Glenn), their most brutal and sadistic, yet
also very intelligent and capable hitman. Jerry is leaving
Las Vegas, pursued by the man who stops at nothing in order
to catch his prey.
Screenplay, written by Lee Wells, who had also written the
novel, probably looked good on paper. It had believable,
realistic characters and had potential for a thrillride
that, unlike most of similar movies, doesn't insult viewers'
intelligence. Unfortunately, that screenplay got into the
hands of Mark L. Lester, director who had been unable to
remedy its flaws nor enhance its virtues. Result is a
formulaic thriller, cut into two half of different qualities
- first part, who establishes the characters is good, while
the other one is bad. The actors are rather good - Scott
Glenn is an excellent as mean, but efficient villain, and
John Glover brings even some comic relief in this quite
serious film. Unfortunately, the nominal lead in the form of
Andrew McCarthy is rather uninspired. Also, the film is
filled with some unnecessary subplots (including awfully
implausible romance) and some sex scenes, which (unlike the
scenes of naturalistic violence) are quite gratuitous. All
in all, although it had good potential for being at least
solid entertainment, THE NIGHT OF THE RUNNING MAN is nothing
more than justifiably forgettable piece of exploitation
cinema.
