Title
Review for Bor lei jun (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ron Strong
GOLDEN HARVEST PRESENTS A JACKIE CHAN PRODUCTION
OF A VINCENT KOK FILM   JACKIE CHAN   TONY LEUNG
CHIU-WAI    SHU QI  "GORGEOUS" ('Bo Lei Cheun'
translation 'The Glass Bottle')   RICHARD YAM
YIN-CHAI  EMIL CHOW   EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS  STEPHEN
CHU & DAVID CHAN   ASSOCIATE PRODUCER  PATRICIA
CHENG  EDITED BY KONG CHI-LEUNG  COSTUME DESIGN BY
DORA NG AND SHIRLEY CHAN  ACTION CHOREOGRAPHY BY
JACKIE CHAN & TH JC STUNTMEN TEAM  ORIGINAL SCORE
BY DENNIE WONG  VISUAL EFFECTS BY MENFOND
ELECTRONIC ARTS  PRODUCED BY JACKIE CHAN
SCREENPLAY BY VICENT KOK AND ANOY LAW  ORIGIANL
STORY BY IVY HO  DIRECTED BY VINCENT KOK
In Cantonese/Mandarin with English Subtitles.  119
minutes  Widescreen (2:35.1)  Not Rated
"Man and Woman are together at first, but once
they come to Earth, they spend forever looking for
each other" That sentiment begins the journey of
Goldie Bu (Shi Qi), a young girl from Taiwan. She
is an adventurous young woman raised by her
restaurant owner parents. One afternoon, a young
fisherman Long Yi (Richard Yam Yin-chai) proposes
to Bu. Bu is amused, but she is not attracted to
the young man. Speaking with her Mother (Elaine
Jin), Bu is told the true meaning of love, that
you can watch the person you love regardless of
what they do, and still feel comfortable and
thrilled.
On the Island, Bu has an unusual friend in a
school of dolphins. One morning she confesses her
feelings of Long Yi to one of the Dolphins. It is
then that she finds a bottle floating near the
dock. Inside is a note, which reads "I'm waiting
for You.. Albert". Bu is intrigued and excited by
the message, half believing that the message may
be meant for her. Bu decides to leave for Hong
Kong to search for her Prince Charming.
Arriving in Hong Kong, Bu meets up with Albert.
But, no romance is in the offing as Albert admits
to being gay and that the note was meant for his
ex-boyfriend. He demands that Bu leave and return
to Taiwan.  Bu is heartbroken. Being soft hearted,
Albert agrees to let Bu stay with him for a while,
turning her quest for romance into a vacation.
Albert is a high class make-up artist and
photographer. Bu becomes his assistant. One
morning while out at sea photographing some
models, Bu meets up with C.N. Chan (Jackie Chan) a
high powered business man and stock market player.
Bu rescues C.N. from an attack by L.W. (Emil
Chow), C.N.'s business and lifelong rival. C.N.
mistakes Bu for a Vietnamese girlfriend of a
powerful Hong Kong mobster, and Bu  goes along
with the charade in a chance to win his heart.
With Albert's help, Bu stages a naively conceived
attack by some (obviously fey) gangsters. C.N.
comes to her rescue, and the romance begins. C.N.
is being confronted continually by his nemesis
L.W. leading to a fight with an Australian fighter
who beats C.N. mercilessly. Bu consoles C.N. after
his loss, and convinces him that he needs to have
more fun. C.N. agrees, and the two start to have
many romantic and fun days together.
It is when C.N. finally confronts Bu with his
knowledge of her charade. Bu leaves unable to cope
with C.N.'s manner. She refuses to be just another
girlfriend to this playboy. C.N. musses, his own
life coming into focus. It is when he is forced to
fight again that C.N. realizes his growing
affection for Bu.
Vincent Kok's 'Gorgeous' is a wonderfully wispy
romantic comedy. This film is as light as anything
one can remember. The films goodhearted nature and
charm come as much from the ensemble cast as it
does from its premise. Shu Qi is absolutely
charming as the innocent girl Bu. Her natural
beauty and infectious smile light up the screen.
Shu plays the character of Bu as a complete
innocent and keeps her that way. While her
character does mature, her innocents remains
intact.
Tony Leung Chiu-wai is hilarious as Albert. A gay
man who sees in Bu a sense of romance that he has
long forgotten. His growing fondness for her,
becoming protective and nurturing. Mr. Leung
deserves credit for making such a minor character
so memorable and endearing. Kudos also should be
given to Richard Yam Yin-chai in his first film.
His portrayal of Long Yi is ripe with marvelous
comic timing. His insolent romanticism  is so
perfect that one can't help but be amused. One
marvelously timed comedic scene has Long Yi in
Albert's apartment (after following Bu to Hong
Kong), drunk and demanding more wine. Bu having
stumbled onto the scene, hides in the
refrigerator. Albert must try to keep Bu from
freezing or suffocation while hiding her from Long
Yi, who stumbles around the kitchen looking for
sake.
And what can be said about Jackie Chan in his
first romantic lead. Well, Chan is up to the
challenge. His charming and disarming smile is on
display for much of the film. His warmth and
growing attachment to Bu is honest and believable.
C.N. is a man who has everything, but the one
thing he misses most is his innocent. With Bu, he
is able to find it. Jackie plays the part of C.N.
as a man of high morals and low aspirations, a
wonderful contradiction of modern day Hong Kong.
He does not attack his enemies as much as punish
them in ways that would make them see the errors
of their ways. Jack's moral that honor and respect
are more important than personal gain is charming
and welcomed.
The rest of the cast is all wonderfully played.
While some characterizations may seem a little
broad, it still seems natural. People with this
much passion could not behave in any other way.
The standout performance of this cast is by Sung
yung-chen, who plays Bu's Father. His boisterous
and blustery character is beautifully played.
Vincent Kok has managed to create a marvelously
charming love story in "Gorgeous". The characters
and situations are rise organically, never seeming
to be placed there for the short sell. While the
basic idea is  convoluted and trite, it works
within the context of the characters. Yes, Bu
would fly off to Hong Kong to find her Prince
Charming without knowing who he is. That is what
her character is, a true romantic. The
cinematography by Man Po-cheung is sumptuous as is
the art direction by Yee Chung-man. The look of
the film is also charming and warm. While some of
the editing is a little abrupt, it is not enough
to detract from the film, and only becomes
noticeable in two short scenes.
And of course everyone will want to know about the
fight scenes. Well, they are fantastically
entertaining. Jackie has managed to do something
in this film that he has never done before. He
actually loses both of the main fights. But while
the first fight almost breaks his spirit, the
second restores it. Brad Allen who plays the
Australian fighter is frightening good. Being
shorter than Chan by 6 inches, his kicks and
punches belay his size, making him one of Jackie's
most formidable opponents. What is most amusing
about the fight scenes is that there is nothing
mean spirited about them. Both men respect one
another and treat each other accordingly. The
admonition by Bradley of "No rules, but no dirty
tricks" is carried throughout the film. These
characters are all honorable men caught in the
service of a dishonorable society. It is through
the fight scenes that Jackie's character does
indeed become a Prince Charming. Even as he loses,
he loses with his honor and his spirit intact.
'Gorgeous' is just that. A wonderfully candy
colored romance that leaves the viewer charmed and
uplifted.
A fitting film for Jackie to end the decade on.
And a marvelous preview of a group of talented
individuals who, I for one look forward to seeing
again.
On a side note.. The film was just purchased for
U.S. distribution by Sony Pictures Entertainment
(Columbia / Tri-star). So expect to see a dubbed
version sometime next year either theatrically on
debuting on HBO.
