Title
Review for War, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
John Walker
In brief: In a bizarre way, I like THE WAR a lot--but for something
     other folks don't seem to have noticed.  I think that's because
     there are two different movies here.  As *talk*, THE WAR is an
     anti-war message piece with supporting subplots; its message is,
     "War makes us crazy."
     Most people seem to have noticed only the talk.  Which is
     strange--doesn't the *action* count?  It's as if even the
     film makers--director Jon Avnet and screenwriter Kathy McWorter,
     in particular--were unaware of the underlying message.
     It's 1970 in dirt-poor Juliette, Mississippi.  The center of THE
WAR is Stu Simmons (Elijah Wood).  But he is crowded around with family
members whose stories are major subplots, all interlocked.  The most
important is his father Stephen (Kevin Costner).  Stephen is a Viet Nam
veteran who couldn't hold a job after returning.  He's back with the
family again after being hospitalized for recurring nightmares.  One
strand in THE WAR is Stephen's interaction with his children and his
warning against the dangers of violence--that in war, we go crazy, we
do things we'll be ashamed of.
     While Stephen was in the Nam, the family lost their house to
termites and County condemnation.  Now they live in a tiny, sort of
squalid little cottage, not much better than a shack, with other
similar houses crammed together cheek-by-jowl.  Stu's mother Lois (Mare
Winningham) holds the family together working two jobs.
     There's also Stu's sister--the film's narrator--Lidia (Lexi
Randall).  If you've seen the trailers, you know that her theme is
racial harmony.  She accepts her two black friends, Elvadine (LaToya
Chisholm) and Amber (Charlette Julius), as equals, and stands up for
them against a segregation-minded summer-school teacher, Miss Strapford
(Christine Baranski).
     But the main theme is Stu--and his tree fort.  Lidia and her
friends have gotten the materials for it, and he'll build it with them
and his two friends, Chet (Adam Henderson) and Marsh (Brennan
Gallagher).  Unfortunately, the girls got the materials from the
junkyard of a local drunk, Mr. Lipnicki (Raynor Scheine), whose six
kids are apparently the local bullies and thugs.  When they find out,
we'll have The War for which THE WAR is named.
     If you've seen any reviews or previews, you should already know
whether THE WAR will likely turn you off.  If you can't stand sermons,
you're in trouble.
     The trailer shows that Miss Strapford has put the black kids in
the back.  And it gives us Lidia's sermon on the subject.  I have no
problem with a 12-year-old *feeling* the way Lidia did.  But (except
for the rustic grammar) being able to give that speech would mean that
momma and poppa were profs at the local college.  (The sermon-sensitive
can be reassured on one point, though: This is *not* a hate letter to
the South.  Miss Strapford is the only one who really drags race in,
and she's more dorky than malicious.)
     Costner, too, has lines that smack of college followed by years
writing editorials for the crusading small-town weekly newspaper
beloved of film makers in the 30s and 40s.  He's Will Rogers updated and
suspicious of violence in all forms.  He's the peaceable guy in the
western who saves the town from the bad guys.
     Momma doesn't have too many lines, but she could be a saint in
some 30s/40s film about farm workers or factory help.  She's the rock
of strength who's still thoroughly womanly.  It may be 1970, but mom
and dad remind me of Depression-era photos from the Farm Security
Administration.  And their speeches and sermons have attracted the most
attention.
     But *Stu* is the center of THE WAR.  And it's as if Stu's role was
written separately from those of the others.  Stu seems more real.
True, he's more rough-hewn eloquent than any 12-year-old I've ever
known.  True, he has major "speeches".  But they seem to arise out of
his character rather than out of a political tract.  He is saying what
he's feeling rather than informing others what they ought to feel or
do.
     The only other characters who struck me as real were the Lipnicki
kids.  (By the way, like Stu, *they don't give sermons*.)  It's like
McWorter had really seen something like this as a kid, and then years
later added in other characters and events to make the "meaning" clear.
     Is the *acting* why I find Stu believable, but not the rest?  Wood
is just massively talented, after all.  He makes even his "speeches"
real and moving.  Maybe he just did a 12-year-old boy better than
Costner, Winningham, and Randall did their roles.
     Unfortunately, I can't imagine *anyone* being able to handle some
of their lines without seeming preachy.  Take one of Stephen's comments
to Stu:
     In fact (if you're not sermon-allergic), Costner made even the
sermons seem real.  And at the end of a confrontation with Lipnicki, he
didn't even seem preachy.
     But I said there were two stories in THE WAR.  If the vocal one is
the sermons, what about the underlying one?
     Practically from word one, I was at a distance from THE WAR.
*Everyone* speaks Southern.  My background is small-town, but it's
small-town Rhode Island.  I haven't dealt with people with
"un-colleged" Southern accents since I was in the Navy.  (And they
didn't do sermons.)
     Maybe it was the slight culture shock that made me compare the
rules of my own kidhood with how things worked in THE WAR.  The
Lipnickis say Stu's trespassing on "their" land near the junkyard.  But
is it theirs?  Lidia says they're squatters even on the junkyard
itself.  And there's stuff in the junkyard from the Simmons's condemned
house.  Nonetheless, with Lidia is a thoroughly calculating kid, and
with her decision to heist stuff from the junkyard, she crossed a major
boundary.
     Suburbanization has been less destructive in Rhode Island than
elsewhere.  Even today, a "Private" or "No Trespassing" sign strikes me
as profoundly bad taste.  As a kid I went wherever I went, and so did
all the other kids.  But once someone put that sign up, it was to be
respected (or violated with only the greatest caution and suitable
guilt if caught).  People who put up such signs might be paranoid
jerks.  But it was *their* property.  That was that.
     So also junkyards.  It might be worthless trash, but it was
*their* worthless trash.  (Junkyards can still be still a *cause
celebre* back home--the owners are seen as the victims of new
suburbanites who want to drive out those who were there first.)
     Without much context, I mentioned the property-right proscriptions
of small-town Rhode Island to a friend.  He groaned.  It seemed rigid,
puritanical, unrealistic.
     But stop and think--if those rules had been observed, the War in
THE WAR would never have happened.
     Can we have an anti-war film that doesn't ask how wars *start*?
*The War* never gives a sermon about trespass, about turf battles,
about the ambiguities of squatters, about filching junk--but without
them, there would have been no film.
     Now, a story.  A friend in my Reserve unit was a pacifist.  (He'd
already been on active duty: real life has its paradoxes!)  He was in
college and working in a factory to pay bills.  There was this one guy
who just harassed him endlessly--I mean, a college kid, a pacifist,
why not?  So, finally, my friend decked him.  After that, the other guy
was his best friend at work!
     (Understanding the guy was an intellectual problem for my friend,
matching the moral problem he had with decking him.)
     I'll give no spoilers about THE WAR, but I'll say that we don't
get the tidy outcome my friend did.  Nonetheless, the usefulness --
even the *need*--of standing up and fighting for what's *yours* is an
absolutely essential element in THE WAR--for *both* Stu and the
Lipnickis.
     And the Lipnicki kids are sort of like that factory worker.
They're not necessarily bad kids; they're probably better than we might
expect them to be, considering their father.  They're thugs, sort of,
but are they really bullies?  We don't see them seeking smaller kids to
pick on; it's more that they run roughshod, that they go too far with a
grudge.
     THE WAR appears to be very deliberately written.  As *talk*, all
the threads are tied together; there are no loose ends.  Everything is
explained.  To which my response is a polite, "That's nice."
     But the *action*, the story about Stu and the Lipnicki kids is
*all* loose ends.  We don't know how it began.  We don't get a speech
from Stu explaining all his motives.  (Not that we need any.)  We don't
know how Stu and the Lipnickis viewed each other or their war
afterward.  We don't know what they "did with it".
     The underlying story is live and real.  It asks why we get into
messes with each other.  For me, it demands we ask whether dour
small-towners might have figured out a way to avoid a lot of nastiness.
     It also asks what we do when when people go too far.  Yes, it
intersects with the talk in warning that the violence is risky--don't
let it get out of hand.  (It might be interesting to consider whether
the *action* of THE WAR could serve as an allegory of U.S. involvement
in Viet Nam.)
     In any event, the story of the action isn't a sermon; it's a
challenge.  It doesn't come back with a clear answer.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Jon Avnet (FRIED GREEN TOMATOES)
Written by      Kathy McWorter
Cast            Elijah Wood, Kevin Costner, Mare Winningham, and Lexi Randall
MPAA Rating     PG-13
Running Time    Approx. 120 minutes
     Kevin Costner takes a surprise second billing in THE WAR, a
heavy-handed "message movie" about a father trying to teach his son
about the consequences of violent action.  Though not quite as cloying
as a rabid romance, this lead-footed film is still way too literal to
be taken seriously.
     The year is 1970, and Stu and Lidia Simmons (Wood and Randall)
have just welcomed their dad Stephen (Costner) home from the war.  He's
wearing scars both inside and out, and he can't hold a job to save his
life, but they still love him.  They even stand by him when he acts
nice to the Lipnickis--a pack of neighborhood children who don't like
either of the Simmons kids.  Said dislike leads to a turf war, which
leads to fighting, which leads to [insert eye-rolling] a valuable
lesson on tolerance and understanding.
     There's a pretty good story here, but you'd never know it by the
way director Jon Avent literalizes every Important Idea in sight.  Take
the first flashback, where Stephen tries to tell his son about what
happened in Vietnam.  Instead of letting Costner chew on a meaty
monologue--a la, say, Robert Shaw in JAWS--Avent cuts to an exploding
jungle with bullets and bodies and all those things that have no place
in a dialogue-driven drama.
     And Avent does this over and over and over again, straight through
the ending where the "big message" is symbolized by a battle over a
treehouse (don't ask).  Granted the whole thing is kinda cute--think
APOCALYPSE NOW meets HOME ALONE meets LORD OF THE FLIES--but what's
left over (in silly speeches) is pretty pathetic.

Author
Sue Roberts
We loved this film. Did we see the same print that was released in the 
U.S.A? It spoke to us. And how refreshing to hear a script with a 
point of view! 
We were really surprised to find the film combined gentle humour round 
a breakfast table and touches of song from the best girlfriends, yet 
could switch to an action sequence and have one unexpectedly on the 
edge of one's seat. The mix of social comment and metaphysical ideas 
was a little like "The Crying Game."  
The film opens on a tree which will be the focus of children's 
attention throughout the summer. However it is the demolition of a 
real house which seals the metaphor of people becoming obsessed with a 
piece of territory. In doing so, they lose sight of the importance of 
people and eventually, that for which they were fighting.
We see Lois, the working woman with her back to the wall, unable to 
supervise her children. On the scrapheap the Lipnicki children, for 
whom no-one cares, so who care for no- one else. Then there are the 
men of both families, who are expected to cope no matter how hard 
their emotional losses, nor how harsh the economic conditions. 
Maybe this is a portrait of the seventies that Americans could not 
relate to, but one has only to open a nineties newspaper in Britain to 
see it is one all too familiar, as our industrial heritage is scrapped 
and miners, steelworkers, and engineers are stamped on by an army of 
accountants.
If this all sounds too politically correct for words, the lightness of 
director John Avnet's touch and the exuberance of the kids makes this 
one of the most enjoyable films in ages.
We were really impressed by the acting, and not just from Costner, who 
puts in an outstandingly sympathetic performance as Stephen, the 
father who returns from Vietnam to a country he is no longer in step 
with.
Elijah Wood, as his son Stu., took over the reins and carried the film 
to its completion without missing a beat. A supporting cast of 
enthusiastic professionals matched with young talent took this text 
and breathed life into it.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Both the strength and weakness of THE WAR is its inability to let
pass an opportunity to teach a lesson.  At times, to the film's
benefit, this sermonizing is seamlessly integrated into the story.  On
other occasions, it sticks out like a proverbial sore thumb, since
there's nothing more uncomfortable or obvious than when a moral calls
attention to itself.
     The primary theme of THE WAR is that violence, irrespective of its
motivation, is never justified.  To illustrate this point, the movie
takes us to 1970 Mississippi and introduces Stephen Simmons (Kevin
Costner), a Vietnam Vet who lost pieces of his soul halfway across the
world when, to save his own life, he left behind a dying friend.  Since
then, he has attempted to reconstruct a shattered life, encouraging his
two children, Stu (Elijah Wood) and Lidia (Lexi Randall), to follow his
pacifist example and searching to re-establish a bond with his wife
Lois (Mare Winningham).
     Stu and Lidia, however, aren't sold on the non-violent way,
especially as it applies to their ongoing feud with the Lipnicki clan,
a group of local bullies who delight in picking on those less
physically gifted.  When the Lipnickis decide to claim a tree fort
built by Stu, Lidia, and their friends, their actions precipitate
an-out battle.
     The anti-war stance taken by THE WAR works primarily because of a
tremendous performance from a potentially unlikely source:  Kevin
Costner.  As was the case in A PERFECT WORLD, the actor impresses by
underplaying his less-than-heroic role.  As long as Stephen is on
screen, the message never threatens to overwhelm the story.  The
character, rendered by Costner with subtlety and care, is searching for
redemption; he wants his children to learn life's harsh truths before
they ever reach that point.
     To a lesser degree, THE WAR imparts the lesson that racism is
bad.  Unfortunately, it does this in an annoyingly heavy-handed manner
by having Lidia come to the defense of her black friend (LaToya
Chisholm) when a teacher tries to relegate the "colored" children to
the back of the classroom.  The young white girl gives an
impassioned--and obviously scripted--speech about ignorance.  While
it's impossible to argue with the sentiment, the presentation is
flawed.
     In addition to Costner's effective performance, Mare Winningham,
Lexi Randall, and LaToya Chisholm are all solid and believable, easily
holding their own in crucial scenes.  Elijah Wood is somewhat less
successful.  For him, several emotional outbursts appear rehearsed.
This is a step up from NORTH for the young actor, but his work here
doesn't equal that of THE ADVENTURES OF HUCK FINN.
     Jon Avnet, whose previous feature was FRIED GREEN TOMATOES,
recaptures a great deal of the "feel" of that 1992 release here
(including a heavy dose of maudlin, manipulative sentiment).  The '70s
tone is aided by an unnecessary and occasionally-intrusive soundtrack
that may have been "inspired" by the success of the FORREST GUMP CD.
     Whatever failings THE WAR may exhibit, however, it is still solid
entertainment, and there are moments of sublime beauty and rare power.
Even at its most affecting and manipulative, the film never strays from
its message or allows its high production values to decline, and that's
a lot more than can be said of a great deal of other current theatrical
releases.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Elijah Wood, Kevin Costner, Mare Winningham, Lexi Randall.
Screenplay:  Kathy McWorter.
Director:  Jon Avnet.
     If they gave out Academy Awards for earnestness, THE WAR would
have to be one of the front-runners.  War, it solemnly intones, is bad;
so are racism and sexism.  And so they are.  But THE WAR unfolds as
though it had discovered those concepts, never letting an opportunity
for an applause-generating speech go by the wayside.  As a result, some
very impressive performances are wasted on a script that just tries far
too hard to deliver a very simplistic moral.
     THE WAR is the story of the Simmons family, living in Juliette,
Mississippi circa 1970.  Father Stephen (Kevin Costner) is recently
returned from Vietnam, suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder
and unable to hold down a job, leaving it to mom Lois (Mare Winningham)
to keep the family afloat.  Their two children, meanwhile, face battles
of their own.  Stu (Elijah Wood) and his friends find themselves in
perpetual conflict with a surly group of siblings called the Lipnickis;
Lidia (Lexi Randall) finds out about racism through the mistreatment of
her black best friends in school.  But the siblings share a love of
their treehouse fort, and learn their own lessons about war when the
Lipnickis try to take it from them.
     Screenwriter Kathy McWorter clearly has her heart in the right
place.  The problem is that it's in too many places.  If all she had
wanted to do was to create an allegorical tale about war, it might have
worked; instead she adds scenes like the one in a summer school
classroom where a racist teacher (Christine Baranski) unfairly accuses
Lidia's friend Elvadine (LaToya Chisholm) of disrupting the class.
It's not even enough that Elvadine gets to tell off the teacher in a
completely over-the-top speech; Lidia has to get her two cents in as
well.  McWorter appears convinced that wherever one speech is good, two
must be even better.  Actually, no speeches would have been preferable
most of the time, particularly in a scene where poor Elijah Wood
practically has to deliver a sermon while trying to save someone's
life.  The script is overloaded with homilies, and needed a good
re-write at least fifteen minutes shorter.
     One of the goals of that re-write should have been removing the
characters of Lidia and her friends entirely.  The relationship between
the Simmons siblings is given only a cursory treatment, and the
narration Lidia provides could just as easily have been provided by
Stu, or not at all.  The girls seem to exist primarily to create a
battle of the sexes with Stu's friends (which the girls win, naturally)
and for the classroom sub-plot which is really superfluous.  THE WAR is
first and foremost about the relationship between Stu and Stephen, and
there are too many tangents which ignore that relationship.
     When Costner and Wood are the focus of attention, THE WAR is
actually quite compelling.  Costner gives an intelligent, understated
performance which shows Stephen's desperate attempts to find purpose in
the post-Vietnam world where he needs to feel he's making a difference,
and to impress upon his children the futility of fighting, while Wood
gives Stu an undercurrent of anger towards Stephen even as he tries to
support him.  There is tremendous conflict in their relationship, and
both actors do a fine job of bringing it out.  Sadly, McWorter and
director Jon Avnet are more interested in heavy-handedness than they
are in character study, so that by the time the climactic battle for
the treehouse rolls around, the point has been made and made and made
again.  Then, just in case you missed it the first ten times, "Peace
Train" plays over the closing credits.
