Title
Review for Village of Daughters (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
VILLAGE OF DAUGHTERS (UK, 1962) Directed by George Pollock.  Written 
by David Pursall, Jack Sheddon. Photography, Geoffrey Faiththfull. 
Editing, Tristam Cones. Music, Ron Goodwin. Cast: Eric Sykes,  Scilla 
Gabel , John Le Mesurier, Gr√©goire Aslan , Warren Mitchell, Anthony 
Morton, Eric Pohlmann, Edwin Richfield, Yvonne Romain, et al. An 
MGM-UA production. Black and white.
George Pollock is a minor British filmmaker who was assistant 
director on several high-class movies of the 1940s, starting with 
Gaslight (1940) and going on to such works as Pimpernel Smith, 
Spitfire, The Demi-Paradise, Blithe Spirit. Brief Encounter, Great 
Expectations, The  Browning Version(1951). All of the above are 
excellent features.
He then became a full-fledged director of a dozen pictures in the 50s 
and 60s. These were not memorable,  with the huge exception of a set 
of four detection comedies: Murder she Said, Murder at the Gallop, 
Murder Ahoy, and Murder Most Foul. These were Agatha Christie 
mysteries in which the sleuth was Miss Marple. All starred the 
quirky, unforgettable and irreplaceable Margaret Rutherford, then in 
her 70s. With her bulk, odd diction, mannerisms and colorful 
eccentricities, Miss Rutherford stole the scenes, the show and the 
audiences' hearts. She later became a Dame of the British Empire.
Pollock directed those works with unabated vigor and humor.  The 
films, most entertaining as well as unpretentious, had excellent 
supporting casts. Another, major asset was provided by Ron Goodwin's 
jaunty, original and memorable music scores. These  became a 
trademark of the films.
Alas, Village of Daughters is in a far lower level than the Miss 
Marple bonbons. It is headed by Eric Sykes whose comedic skills were 
appreciated in England but who remains almost unknown in the USA. 
Village also has a few good performers, familiar supporting/character 
British actors such as John Le Mesurier, as the local priest,  or 
Gregoire Aslan, as the mayor and father of pretty and marriageable 
Anunciata. Aslan,  Swiss-born and of Armenian descent, has appeared 
in dozens of films, many of the French but several too from the 
European Continent and the USA. A chameleon player, he played men of 
many professions and nationalities, including Arabs, Italians and 
Greeks.
In Village, however, neither the main nor the supporting characters 
are memorable. The plot is simplistic. In a Sicilian village, there 
are many single girls but a scarcity of males. The latter have 
emigrated to seek their fortune.  Suddenly comes the news (which the 
postman, of course, reads first) of the coming of an envoy from 
abroad, a man delegated to select a bride for a now-wealthy 
ex-villager. Eric Sykes, playing a down-and-out salesman, is mistaken 
for the envoy. Complications ensue. They are generally neither 
original nor funny.
The Brits who play Sicilians are unconvincing--but the 
made-in-England Sicilian setting is better.  The score by Ron Goodwin 
is mediocre.
The subject and its treatment were already ourdated  by 1962 standards.
