Title
Review for Search for Signs of Inteligent Life in the Universe, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Eugene Miya
     As a warning, I saw the play twice (the second time in the first
row; much better!).  I also have Jane Wagner's book of the same title.
A documentary on Lily Tomlin (PBS) describes the development of this
play.  The film is an adaptation to Tomlin's successful play of the same
name.  The title is intriguing, especially since the real "Search" work
is done here at Ames.  The "Search" in the film is the alien search for
intelligent life.
     The interest in the film is to see how she takes the one-woman play
and adapt it for the big screen with costumes and makeup.  The majority
of the film does not have Tomlin in character garb, but rather, in the
suit she had designed for the stage with the limited set of props she
had.  A few of the characters make brief appearances in costume.
     The film concerns one of Tomlin's long time characters, Trudy the
bag lady.  Trudy is in contact with extra-terrestrials and she has the
ability to pop into other people's lives (although randomly): a la
Vonnegut.  Her other characters include Agnes Angst, Ludd (male, Agnes'
grandfather), Agnes' grandmother, Brandy (a prostitute), Paul, etc.
(names you can get from Wagner's book(.  The films consist of various
monologues and dialogues between the Tomlin characters (all
inter-related).
     Some of the events of the film are clearly dated.  So the humor is
a bit topically and behind.  Tomlin has a nice delivery, but for those
unfamiliar with her work, you may/may not like it.  The print I saw at
Camera Three was surprising poor for a new movie.  I think I like the
stage performance better (especially when she came down and sat on the
edge and just answered questions from the audience).
     Should you go see it?  At $6, it might be better to wait until it
reaches video.  Die-hard fans might go to relive the theater, but
sketches and diagloue have changed from the book and what I remember to
make a shorter film (mostly Act 1 material removed).  
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@orville.nas.nasa.gov
  {uunet,mailrus,other gateways}!ames!eugene
