Title
Review for Marido perfecto, El (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Nusair
"The Perfect Husband" is an odd little movie.  I've looked it up in all my
movie-resource books, including Maltin, and none of them have a listing
for it.  Even the always reliable Internet Movie Database does not contain
one review for it.  It has a major star (Tim Roth), so I wonder what
happened to it during its release.
No matter.  It's an entertaining film about a womanizing opera singer in
the 19th century, who finds himself falling in love with a woman he cannot
have.  Naturally, the womanizer is played by Roth.  This is the type of
role he excels at; the cocky, self-sure boor who is brought down a few
pegs before the film ends.  He's great in the film, as are the supporting
actors.
There's not much plot here, though.  The movie basically follows the Roth
character through a few days of his life, and that's it.  We don't really
get a sense of what he's about.  We just know that he's a ladies man that
is used to playing the field, without ever letting himself become attached
to any one woman.
Also, there's no real reason that the film needs to take place in the
1800's.  Everything that occurs in the movie could easily happen in the
90's, with one exception.  Roth prides himself on having survived 29
duels.  These duels would come about when the husbands of the women he
would sleep with would find out, and challenge him.  Obviously, this could
not happen now.  Likely, the irate husband would just flat-out shoot him. 
There would be no sense of gentlemanly conduct, as displayed in the act of
the duel.
"The Perfect Husband" is one of those movies that is instantly
forgettable, but you don't notice until it's over.
