Title
Review for Tenku no shiro Rapyuta (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I make no claim to being anything other than a novice anime (Japanese
animation) enthusiast, so I can't tell you how LAPUTA, CASTLE IN THE SKY stands
up to other anime out there.  I think it safe to say that it would probably be
labeled a "children's story" by a casual assessor -- not that any
self-respecting adult can't swallow some hard-earned sophistication and enjoy
the Bejeezus out of it.  The story, of a young boy and a mysterious girl who
floats, unconscious, out of the sky, is a fable cushioned in the very best
visual imagery and invention.  Any show with this much imagination breaks the
boundaries set by "adult" and "children" conventions, and deserves a look.
     The story is another variation on the boy/girl/quest story, with a bit of
environmental morality thrown in at the end; some might find the story a bit
simple and untutored -- I think it only enforces the air of innocence around
the protagonists, but there you go, you've been warned.  What really makes
LAPUTA worth watching is the imagery: fantastic sky-vehicles, anarchistic and
futuristic at the same time; Victorian villains and silly comic relief pirates
(with a nod of the head towards another anime production, NAUSICAA); and a
sense of freedom that animation allows the gifted director to use.  Hayao
Miyazaki is considered at the very pinnacle of anime directors, and this film
gives dozens of examples why -- Stephen Spielburg could learn some things about
creative point-of-view from Miyazaki.  (Rumor has it that he did.)  I came away
with so many delightful images from this film ... a girl floating down among
the clouds, enveloped in a bubble of light; a impersonal-then-personal robot,
like something from a Moebius sketch, rampaging through a fortress; the idea of
travel, exploration and battle among the clouds.  There's work here that's
every bit as good as the best of Max Fleisher in the mid-to-late 30s; while
this level of quality isn't constantly evident, the work is never shoddy.  And
the effect is magnified by seeing it on a large screen (an experience animation
fans are rarely allowed to experience).
     The film isn't sub-titled; I cannot tell you how good the translation is,
though I have heard that the dialogue is toned a bit towards a younger
audience, though the effect can't be too severe from what I saw.  Good
animation, in my experience, feeds the imagination, suspends belief, and takes
you back to a cleaner, younger self.  By that definition, LAPUTA is very, very
good.
