Title
Review for American Me (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     AMERICAN ME is a film by Edward James Olmos.  It was written by
Floyd Mutrux and Desmond Nakano.  It stars Olmos, William Forsythe, Pepe
Serna, Evelina Fernandez.  It is rated R for scenes of extreme violence.
     AMERICAN ME is one of the darkest, grimmest, most unrelenting, and
challenging movies I have ever seen.  Honestly, I dreaded its start and
only went in the first place because Lyndol insisted.  And I have to say
that I was completely captivated by the honesty and skill in its making.
And I also have to say I would never volunteer to sit through it again.
As Eliot said, "Humankind cannot stand too much reality."
     This is the story of Santana, wonderfully played by Olmos, and of
his friends, family, and community in the barrio of East Los Angeles.
Santana is a ruthless killer who organizes a gang in Folsom state
penitentiary.  He convinces himself and others that his purpose is to
help his people, but in the end he comes to realize that his real goal
was power.
     The violence begins with the Zoot Suit Riots of wartime L.A. and
continues without intermission to the very end.  We are forced to face
up to the horrors of rape (man-on-woman and man-on-man), stabbings,
stranglings, burning alive, mutilation, and the rest of the catalog.
But the violence is all to a single purpose and entirely free of all
imputations of exploitation.  Olmos sees his movie strictly in didactic
terms as a cautionary tale to young Santanas out there today.  Olmos
wants to show us how desperate the powerless are for respect (a theme
that figures in one scene of the diametrically opposite GRAND CANYON,
btw).  He launches a full-scale assault on the cult of machismo.  And he
scares the hell of me and depresses me with the hopelessness of the
cycle in a way few movies or documentaries have ever reached me.
     Olmos achieved his first recognition in the Miami Vice TV series
and then with his portrayal of East L.A. math teacher Jaime Escalante
in STAND AND DELIVER, which role earned him an Oscar nomination.  Olmos
is a powerful performer, who bears an uncanny resemblance to Humphrey
Bogart in his acne-pitted and scarred face and his style of acting.
     The ensemble acting by the mostly unfamiliar ethic performers is
fresh, original, and forceful.  Especially to be commended are William
Forsythe as JD and Pepe Serna as Mundo, Santana's closest henchmen, and
Evelina Fernandez as the woman who sees most clearly who Santana is.
     I can also recommend the editing of AMERICAN ME, which at times
created in me an almost unbearable tension, as in a sequence that cuts
between Santana on the outside on his first romantic encounter and a
group of inmates on the inside moving along to a nearly unsupportable
and horrifying climax that is simultaneously echoed to only a slighter
degree on the outside.  If it helps, you might try focusing on the
technical excellence of this film, which is first rate.
     I recommend AMERICAN ME to you.  (The title is drawn from Beatrice
Griffith's 1947 study of Mexican-American "Pachuco" culture.)  The movie
will rattle your cage, disturb your sureties, and reward you with a
rare, if harrowing, movie experience of real substance.  But be warned:
"Abandon all hope," etc.
