Title
Review for Young Americans, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Globalisation, like any other phenomenon, has its own dark
side. It may manifest itself in the spreading of certain
forms of social pathology that were supposed to be alien and
unimaginable for certain parts of the world. For the makers
of 1993 British crime drama THE YOUNG AMERICANS the thing in
question is American-style form of gangland violence, which
was alien to the more peaceful and enlightened Britain.
The plot begins with a series of brutal hits of gangland
bosses that rocked the London underworld. The police,
accustomed to the old and less bloody ways of settling
gangland scores, is helpless and it needs outside help. That
help arrives in the form of Joe Harris (played by Harvey
Keitel), DEA agent who is about to use its long experience
in fighting drug lords and advice Scotland Yard how to react
to the new threat. He soon realises that the mastermind
behind the killings is Frazer (played by Viggo Mortensen),
American drug baron who came to London and found a simple
and ingenious way to take over the city's drug trade by
recruiting naive youngsters from city slums and turning them
into cheap and expendable assassins. One of the potential
recruits is Chris (played by Craig Kelly) whose late father
had chosen the path of crime. Nevertheless it is Chris who
is going to help Harris in bringing Frazer down by agreeing
to infiltrate drug lord's organisation.
Danny Cannon was praised as one of the most promising
British filmmakers in the early 1990s and this film shows
why low budget THE YOUNG AMERICANS has plenty of impressive
sights and sounds, and the atmosphere of the film is
overwhelming. The photography of Vernon Leyton nicely
captures images of London's mean streets, while the musical
score by David Arnold (including Bjork's song "Play Dead")
is the feast for people's ears. The acting is also very
good, with reliable American character actors like Keitel
and Mortensen working hand-in-hand with group of relatively
unknown yet very talented young British actors (of which
only Thandie Newton reached some sort of global fame
afterwards). Unfortunately, the script and, to a lesser
degree, direction were somewhat lacking. Danny Cannon
overused slow motion and thus made this film longer than it
should be. The script by David Hilton and Danny Cannon,
apart from creating few impressive characters, also lacked
substances and instead of plot we have Hollywood formulas
and cliches. The most notable of them all is romantic and
near-apologist view of the local hoods as the last bastion
of national pride, not very different from the way some
black filmmakers in America used to glorify gangstas from
U.S. inner city ghettos. Danny Cannon nevertheless had
talent and THE YOUNG AMERICANS is the reason why we should
view his departure to Hollywood as a loss to British cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
