Title
Review for Olivier, Olivier (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Nine-year old Olivier is what his mother describes as a "delicate
child."  His relationship with his older sister Nadine is somewhat
tempestuous.  The two enjoy playing together, and there is genuine
affection between them, but Nadine is jealous of all the attention that
Olivier gets from their mother.  It's obvious to both children who the
favorite is.  Tension is present in the marriage Olivier's parents
Serge (Francois Cluzet) and Elizabeth (Brigitte Rouan), one of the
causes of which is Elizabeth's babying of Olivier.  Then, one day while
running an errand for his father, Olivier disappears.  Police and
civilian investigations turns up nothing.  Nadine is devastated and the
marriage of Serge and Elizabeth can't weather the strain.  The scene
then switches to six years later in Paris, where a young boy claiming
to be Olivier (Gregoire Colin) and knowing a lot about his life and
family, appears.
     In many ways, the central story of OLIVIER OLIVIER is a cross
between the French film THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE and the Josephine
Tey novel BRAT FERRAR.  Both deal about the re-appearance of someone
believed dead.  However, where BRAT FERRAR and MARTIN GUERRE focus
primarily on questions of identity, OLIVIER OLIVIER is more concerned
with the dynamics of a family.
     That's not to say that the mystery in OLIVIER OLIVIER is any less
intriguing or satisfying than that in the other two stories.  Indeed,
many of the elements that make MARTIN GUERRE so beguiling are present
here.  We may suspect the truth early on, but it isn't until the last
few scenes when we find out for sure.  The ultimate resolution of
OLIVIER OLIVIER's mysteries is satisfying.
     The movie takes approximately a half-hour to strike into the meat
of the story, but it is thirty minutes well-spent.  We are given an
opportunity to get to know the characters in all their complexity.
Great care is also taken in making the setting real.  We are given a
sense of where this film takes place and how it is that a child can
disappear with so little trace.
     The dynamics of the family, both before and after Olivier's
disappearance, are fascinating--as well as genuine.  Of special
interest is the love/hate relationship between Olivier and his sister,
and the way that Nadine's often-extreme jealousy works into the mix.
Of all the interaction in the movie, that between these two stands
out.
     As is almost always the case with French-made films that reach
screens in the United States, the acting is superb.  All four leads
play their roles flawlessly.  Perhaps the most difficult and convincing
task is given to Marina Golovine, and she carries it off with aplomb.
Brigitte Rouan's Elizabeth is in some ways reminiscent of Susan
Sarandon's character in LORENZO'S OIL.
     OLIVIER OLIVIER is not a film without problems.  There are some
unanswered questions that nag at the viewer's mind and the eerie,
mystical powers attributed to Nadine serve little purpose.  The story
could have been as strong--if not stronger--without them.
     Overall, however, this is a powerful and effective film that works
equally well as a drama and a mystery.  It's pace is slow, but it is
never dull.  Director/writer Agnieszka Holland has crafted a film that
is heads-and-shoulders above EUROPA EUROPA, her well-received, but
melodramatic, previous effort.  Where that movie occasionally sputtered,
this one sails through clearly to a memorable conclusion.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Lon Ponschock
     You will see it at the video shop and think it is a romance or
maybe something on a subject you would like to avoid.
     Actually it's about *a lot* of subjects you would like to avoid
and that is why is a very special film.
     It is about the secret rituals of childhood too.  And in one
wonderful scene (a bit reminiscent of THE REFLECTING SKIN) there is
this image of pain and loss and grieving which may stay with you
forever.  Because these images are so powerful, I will not describe
them further.
     I have written about the work of this director before.  Agnieszka
Holland also did EUROPA, EUROPA and THE SECRET GARDEN.  Here, as in
EUROPA, there are deceptions and revelations, posings and discoveries.
     Olivier is a little boy who becomes missing.  After six years of
grieving and pain a teenage boy comes into the lives of his parents and
his slightly older sister, Elizabeth.
     Somewhat like the way that a stranger changes the lives of the
characters in SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION, here in OLIVIER we see a
marvelous and disturbing example of that quote from DEGREES:
     In OLIVIER that door reveals all in the end.  And it is well worth
your viewing time to get there.
