Title
Review for Pretty as a Picture: The Art of David Lynch (1997) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Pretty as a Picture: The Art of David Lynch
Produced and Directed by Tony Shallon
     Although this is not the first documentary I have watched, it would
have to be the first one I have reviewed. Sure, every once in a while I see
some PBS special or HBO documentary that I find fascination. For instance, I
recommend PBS' `From Jesus to Christ', a fascinating 13 part compilation of
interviews with theological experts that will turn on the brain of any
student of religious history.  I would also sometimes check out and HBO's
occasionally good, occasionally thrill-of-the-week `America Undercover'
series.  However, for the most part I avoid seeing any film that will
seriously educate me.  I suppose its part of my personal belief that, 9
times out of 10, you go to a movie to turn your mind off.
     However, I was at a college campus recently, was bored, and someone
directed me to the library where they have a good collection of videos.  I
went looking for Lynch's Eraserhead, his only feature-length American film
that I have yet to see.  Instead I saw the documentary Pretty as a Picture:
The Art of David Lynch, which was advertised on the Lost Highway
videocassette.
     Documentaries are just like any other type of film: done well, they are
compelling, intriguing works.  Done terribly, they make you want to shut
them off.  Shallon's documentary was an interesting piece, one that I didn't
sleep through, didn't have any trouble watching, and found very interesting
besides.
     To think of it best, imagine looking at yourself in a funhouse mirror.
That is what watching David Lynch is like.  Now imagine looking at the same
pictures through a lens that clears things up a little bit.  That is what
watching this documentary is like.  For anyone who doesn't understand Lynch
films (most of the general population) and would like to, I recommend
checking out this film.  If you understand Lynch, then you probably are like
me: a complete Lynch jag and the very idea of pulling back the curtain and
revealing the Wizard turns you on so much that you have to watch this film.
     The first thing you will notice as the curtain falls away is the Lynch
is not at all the person whom you would expect.  He isn't a complete
oddball, he doesn't look like he's ready to kill someone or blow up a
building.  The thing that will strike you about David Lynch is that, in
contrast to his truly insane and ambiguous films, he is a very direct,
grounded person.
     Pretty As a Picture takes us through the making of his latest film Lost
Highway, an extremely ambiguous film that I have watched about six times and
still don't have a damn clue as to what is going on.  Using this as a base,
it travels back to his experiences that led him to a career in art, provides
us a window into his surprisingly normal family (although you get about the
weirdest treatment for ants in the kitchen you'll ever hear), and shows us
his humanity in ways we never though possible.
    It takes us onto the set of Lost Highway, shows us the fanatical
devotion cast and crew have for the incredibly amicable and charismatic
individual.  Rarely do you have an entire cast that works with no one else,
even rarer is the crew that does so.  However, with David Lynch you have
actors such as Kyle MacLachlan who never did anything without Lynch until
1987, and producers such as Mary Sweeny, who have been with David Lynch
since 1986.
     With such segments of the film as showing us scenes from Lynch's first
three shorts (Six Men Getting Sick, The Alphabet, The Grandmother) and a
part devoted entirely to Lynch's paintings and photography (which, I
daresay, is even more impressive than the incredible visual aspects to his
films), the skilled director displays for us a much more in depth version of
Lynch than one will ever be able to glean from his films.
     Much as, when someone watches the first good film, no one needs to tell
them its good, no one needs to tell me that Pretty as a Picture is good.  I
simply know.
