Title
Review for Buried Alive (1990/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
90 min, R, Horror, 1990
Director: Gerard Kikoine
Cast: Robert Vaughn, Donald Pleasence, Karen Witter, John Carradine,
      Nia Long, Bill Butler, Ginger Lynn Allen
     The film adaptation of some short stories by Edgar Allan Poe.
Karen Witter is hired by Robert Vaughn to come and work at the girls
facility he runs called Ravenscroft.  Girls start disappearing from
Ravenscroft and the police assume that they have run away.  Witter
starts having weird dreams of a pulsating brick wall after she starts
working at Ravenscroft.  Witter also hears screams at night that no one
else hears, are they real or her imagination.
     There is no short story ever written by Edgar Allan Poe entitled
"Buried Alive."  The film BURIED ALIVE is a combination of Poe's stories
"The Cask of Amontillado," "The Black Cat," and pieces of his other
short stories.  The film has almost nothing to do with the stories which
it is "based on."
     The only similarity that I could find between these stories I have
just described and the film is that someone gets walled up by bricks in
them.  However if you are just looking for a horror film to see and are
not looking for any of Poe's stories you might think about this movie.
This film is part of a series of produced by Harry Alan Towers that are
coming over from Italy.  The only other films, that I know of, that are
also coming over are THE PIT AND THE PENDULUM (which is already in
video stores) and THE HOUSE OF USHER.  There are probably others.  Don't
get this film confused with the 1989 film BURIED ALIVE with Tim Matheson
and Jennifer Jason Leigh.
     The film is the last film by the late John Carradine, although he
is not on the screen very much.  If you are a diehard fan of John
Carradine I don't think that is a good enough reason just to run out and
see the film.
     For the rating: for enjoyability I gave the film a four (out of
five), for following Edgar Allan Poe I gave the film a zero.  The film
is a direct-to-video release, like THE PIT AND THE PENDULUM.  BURIED
ALIVE is rated R for explicit language, graphic violence, and female
nudity.
+Spoilers+   +Spoilers+   +Spoilers+   +Spoilers+   +Spoilers+   +Spoilers+
     "The Cask of Amontillado" is about a man (no name was ever given in
the book) that was insulted by a wine connoisseur called Fortunado.  The
man lives with the insult for several years.  He finally gives in to
himself and tricks Fortunado into his wine vaults to taste some
Amontillado.  To make sure Fortunado comes, the man keeps on telling
Fortunado if it is a great inconvenience he can always bring Luchesi,
another wine connoisseur, to the Amontillado instead.  Fortunado's greed
won't let Luchesi go instead of him, even though he has a cold.  The man
brings Fortunado to his house and brings him into his wine vaults.  The
man offers Fortunado wine getting him very drunk as they go inside the
vaults.  When the man has Fortunado deep in his vaults he chains him up
and bricks him in, tossing his torch in just before the last brick to
make sure all the oxygen gets depleted.
     "The Black Cat" is about this man (no name was ever given for him
either) who is an alcoholic.  His wife happens to love pets and has
many.  He abuses them when he is under the influence of the alcohol.  An
all black cat, which followed him home one day, he has found a liking
for.  Because of this he keeps from abusing the cat.  One night in a
drunken fury he grabs the cat and cuts out its eye.  For many days the
cat avoids him, but one night he catches the cat and hangs it in the
garden.  That night his house catches fire and he and his wife escape
unharmed.  On one of the outside walls is a white silhouette of the cat
which he had hung.  Following this, in their new apartment, an almost
totally black cat shows up and takes up an immediate liking for the
man's wife.  The man however hates the cat because it is missing the
same eye as their former cat.  One night the man goes into the basement
to kill the cat.  His wife stops him and the man ends up killing her.  
He walls her up in his basement and then hunts for the cat, but cannot
find it.  After four days the police show up and want to know if they
can search the house.  The man, confident in the job he did of walling
up his wife, allows them to make their search.  When they are in the
basement the man taps on the new wall showing the police how well the
house is built.  After the tapping a wailing cry comes from behind the
wall and the police open it up and find the man's wife, who had already
begun to decompose.  The police also found the cat which caused the
man's wife's death.
     Carradine, I felt, gave a disappointing performance as Vaughn's
dad, who experimented on Vaughn.  Somehow the experimenting made Vaughn
into a killing psycho, but why did he choose to wall people up?  That,
to the best of my knowledge, was never explained.  Another problem is
that the girls from Ravenscroft go into the basement to party and
explore, yet none of them ever saw Carradine down in the basement.
Witter saw Carradine when she went in the basement (the man in the
wheelchair).  The other thing that bothered me is that no one saw the
new bricking in the basement, surely someone had to notice.
