Title
Review for Hair (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Few days ago I was watching Brannagh's version of LOVE
LABOUR'S LOST and was again reminded of the lack of musicals
in contemporary Hollywood. Musicals have been almost
vanished from American cinema for nearly two decades, but
the dying years of that genre were glorious. At least we
might come to this conclusion judging by the quality of
HAIR, 1979 musical by Milos Forman. This film also happens
to have rather great sentimental value to the author of this
review; long time ago I received the movie soundtrack as
birthday present and it is one of the most treasured vinyl
records in my collection.
Plot of this film, based on the cult 1960s musical by Gerome
Ragni, James Rado and Galt McDermott, begins during the
Vietnam War when young and naÂ‹ve Oklahoma farm boy Claude
Hooper Bukowsky (played by John Savage) receives draft
notice. In order to see some world before going to Army he
makes a trip to New York City and spends some time wondering
around Central Park. There he meets group of hippies led by
unorthodox Berger (played by Treat Williams) and immediately
strikes friendship with them, despite having ambivalent
attitude towards their irresponsible lifestyle dominated by
drugs and free love. His idea is to have some good time
before he goes to recruitment centre, while Berger hopes
that Claude would reconsider his plans and join their merry
band for good, especially after falling in love with
beautiful Manhattan debutante Sheila (played by Beverly
d'Angelo). Claude's brief romance with Sheila, however,
isn't reason enough for him to change his mind and he joins
Army. After few months Sheila receives letter from Claude
and again gets in touch with Berger and his friends. Berger
decides to travel all the way to Nevada in order to visit
Claude before he is shipped to Vietnam. That trip would in
the end result with tragedy.
Czech immigrant Milos Forman perhaps didn't look like the
best choice for the director of the movie version of popular
Broadway musical, bit his Hollywood record before and after
this film justified producers' decision. Forman showed great
fascination with the popular culture of his adopted country
yet his perspective of the outsider often allowed him to
approach American themes and characters from unusual angles.
That often resulted with original and powerful works, and
HAIR is one of them. Originally considered to be unfilmable,
especially a decade after the time when its messages about
free love, anti-establishment rebellion and opposition to
Vietnam War became outdated, this material actually
benefited from Forman's outsider perspective. He approached
Swinging Sixties and hippie movement with critical and often
ironical distance - people like Berger are shown to be nice,
but generally irresponsible people who, despite all their
anti-establishment philosophy, still had to rely on more
down-to-earth types like Claude or their parents. Forman's
ironical approach also manifested by casting - veteran
director Nicholas Ray, man with a reputation of Hollywood
rebel, is given the role of General that represents war and
establishment - everything hippies rebelled against. But the
most visible element of Forman's irony is in the finale -
black humour in those scenes doesn't hamper its strong
emotional impact.
Musical aspect of HAIR is superb. The performers are up to
the task, including John Savage, and the musical numbers in
most cases seem natural. Forman usually doesn't allow them
to get in the way of the plot and when he does, he makes
some interesting editing experiments. One of them is "Black
Boys"/"White Boys" being used for scenes in recruiting
centre with humorous results, and another comes in the form
of equally hilarious acid trip sequence during "Electric
Blues"/"Old Fashioned Melody". Acting is also very good -
usually underrated Treat Williams gives one of his best
performances and John Savage is also very good, especially
when we compare his character to the somewhat similar role
in THE DEER HUNTER. Annie Golden as Jeannie is charming
while Beverly d'Angelo is somewhat inept and not too
attractive Sheila.
HAIR, although very likeable film, has some flaws.
Choreography by Twyla Tharp is fun to watch, but at some
times it gets too distracting. Some songs are included for
the sake of following Broadway original and the even last
scene in powerful "Let the Sunshine In" has some problems.
Basically, the last shot in Arlington is followed by the
scenes of thousands of anti-war protestors in front of the
White House. This last scene, which suggest that the Love
Generation stopped the war leaves the bitter taste in mouths
of those who know what happened to those young, idealistic
people in Reagan years and how their opinion on war changed
when they stopped worrying about getting drafted themselves.
But our cynical 1990s perspective shouldn't prevent us to
enjoy this extraordinary piece of cinema.
Review written on September 25th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
