Title
Review for Warriors of Virtue (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mario Yedidia, Angus Macfadyen, Marley Shelton, Chao-Li Chi, J.
Todd Adams, Adrienne Corcoran, Doug Jones, Don W. Lewis, Jack Tate
Director: Ronnie Yu
Producers: Dennis Law, Ronald Law, Christopher Law, Jeremy Law, and
Patricia Ruben
Screenplay: Michael Vickerman & Hugh Kelley
If you thought THE TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES or POWER RANGERS were
bad, wait till you watch WARRIORS OF VIRTUE. This creation has sunk the
quality of children's movies to a new all time low. I should have seen
it coming and heeded my friend's warning. No good can come from butt
kicking kangaroos, carrying far-eastern religious philosophies.
The dialogue is so garbled, that one may perhaps gain the true meaning
behind the gibberish, if one was perhaps meditating on Speed' and only
then if struck by lightning first. The ending comes as suddenly as
kangaroos becoming TRANSFORMERS. In this case, they merge into a bright
light and blast the bad guy into oblivion. What a major cop-out for an
ending!
As for each of the Roos  there are five of them, and each symbolises a
virtue that is colour coded - blue (water), red (fire), silver (metal),
green (wood) and white (air). They are all pretty lame (not to mention
stupid), except for great tail strength. As they started to annoy me
during the movie, I felt like tying them together and stringing them up
by their tails for a good Mexican Pińata.
Most annoying of all is the kid (Mario Yedidia) who finds himself lost
in the world of Tao. I detest whiny kids and this one isn't short on
that. Besides that, the director, Ronny Yu who is best known for his
Hong Kong fantasy, kick flicks' ie THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR, has made
this children's movie a little too outlandish for my taste.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WARRIORS OF VIRTUE features five organic superheroes, who must
rely on the natural weapons of earth, water, metal, wood, and fire to
fight their battles.  They possess the classic virtues of benevolence,
righteousness, order, wisdom and loyalty, and their creed does not
permit them to kill, even in the heat of battle.  Their hokey latex
suits make them look like donkeys standing on their hind legs, but
actually they are supposed to be fighting kangaroos known as
Roo-Warriors.  As Dave Berry would say, "I am not making this up."
     Four brothers, Chris, Dennis, Jeremy, and Ron Law, who are medical
doctors from Hong Kong, had the idea for the film and are its
producers.  Although adults may be bored stiff by the confusing story
and find the outfits laughable, the film will undoubtedly find an eager
audience with the grade school group.
     The film starts off strongly with a highly imaginative kung fu
sequence inside the kitchen of a Chinese restaurant.  Peter Pau's
cinematography is stunning throughout the film, especially during the
food photography.  The images remind one of LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.
A lavish food scene of sumptuous beauty is the last thing one expects
in a kids' movie, especially a magical, superhero one.  Another lavish
scene has moving lanterns in the distance against a bluish night.  This
one appears as though lifted out of a Metropolitan Opera production.
     Wide eyed Mario Yedidia, who was George in the movie JACK, plays
Ryan Jeffers, a boy with big ambitions but with a metal brace on one of
his legs.  "It's pretty hard to fly if you have a broken wing," he
explains to his friend and mentor from the restaurant.  Ryan, whom we
first meet reading on the toilet, is absorbed in his sword and sorcery
books.  His imaginary life has all the aspects missing from his real
life and more.
     One day, the school quarterback and local Lucifer, dares Ryan to
walk on a pipe over a treacherous whirlpool.  Ryan falls and "dies,"
but awakens in an underworld populated by the type of heroes whom he
has read about.  And, miracle of miracles, his leg has been cured and
the brace has disappeared.
     In Ryan's new and magical world, the Warriors of Virtue, led by
Master Chung (Chao Li Chi) fight the forces of evil controlled by a
warlord named Komodo, played by Angus MacFadyen, who was Robert the
Bruce in BRAVEHEART.  The less said about MacFadyen's atrocious acting,
the better.
     One of the people Ryan meets in this underworld kingdom is a
gorgeous girl named Elysia, played by Marley Shelton, who was Tricia
Nixon in NIXON.  Shirley Chan's costumes for her are luxurious gowns,
some in innocent white with high necks and some low cut and in
voluptuous colors.  Both are in strong contrast to the dull forest
colors on the rest of the actors.  My immediate reaction on seeing her
was a desire to tell the kid to lose those donkeys and grab the girl.
     Elysia gives Ryan a 30-second explanation of the characters and
their places in his new environment, but it makes about as much sense
as flipping through the Cliff's Notes version of "War and Peace."
Eventually, the story comes together somewhat, but the confusion
remains.  It feels like you are watching the twenty-fourth episode of a
dungeons and dragons series, where you missed the first twenty-three
episodes.
     As an adult, there is only one way to survive the film -- crank
your brain down to third grade level.  Ignoring the silly plot and
funny rubber heads, you can begin to appreciate the majesty of the rest
of the production.  The sets are by Academy Award winner Eugenio
Zanetti, who won the award this past year for his creations for
RESTORATION.  In both films, the sets are the most impressive parts of
the movie.  Zanetti's vision of a fantasy world has a forest of
gigantic trees all shrouded in fog.  A stream runs through the dense
forest, and the houses are build amongst the trees.  A tad too dark for
the preschool set, but beautiful nevertheless.  He and the director of
photography clearly worked together closely on the effect they wanted
to create.
     The film is at its most magical in the choreographing of the fight
sequences.  They are done in a blur with the characters whirling around
each other.  Golden, autumnal leaves swirl with them in a dazzle of
color.
     Finally, I must comment at length on the PG rating of the film,
which I fear may be too lenient.  There is a single bad cuss word in
the film, and it is used effectively for humor in one of the movie's
best lines.  Still, it is just the sort of inappropriate phrase that
your kid will repeat endlessly.  The film has several open mouth
kissing scenes, where the kisses are carefully aborted just before the
lips and tongues touch.  The biggest problem comes in several violent
scenes which would have worked just as well without the blood.  If you
make the mistake of taking kids younger than seven, they may repeat
Ryan's plea: "I don't want to be here anymore.  I don't want to see
death.  I just want to go home."
     WARRIORS OF VIRTUE runs 1:41.  It is rated PG.  The film's target
audience is the grade school crowd.  Younger ones may be frightened,
and older ones bored.  My son, Jeffrey (age 8), says the film is
"super," and wants me to take him to see it again soon.  The beauty of
the production convinced me to give the picture thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mario Yedidia, Angus Macfadyen, Marley Shelton, Chao-Li Chi, 
      J. Todd Adams, Adrienne Corcoran, Doug Jones, Don W. Lewis, 
      Jack Tate
Director: Ronnie Yu
Producers: Dennis Law, Ronald Law, Christopher Law, Jeremy Law, 
      and Patricia Ruben
Screenplay: Michael Vickerman & Hugh Kelley
Cinematography: Peter Pau
Music: Don David
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     WARRIORS OF VIRTUE is a great title.  Unfortunately, it's not a 
great movie.  The film, a family-oriented fantasy-adventure, is an 
amalgamation of Asian mysticism, cartoon violence, J.R.R. Tolkien, STAR 
WARS, and THE WIZARD OF OZ.  For originality, coherence, and 
intelligence, it's on par with STARGATE and INDEPENDENCE DAY.  For 
entertainment, it's a notch below.
     The film opens with an ominous, disembodied voice declaring, "I 
remember a world with no wars, no warriors.  But now all that has 
changed."  It seems that the evil warlord Komodo (Angus Macfadyen) has 
been systematically destroying the energy source of the mythical world 
of Tao in order to prolong his life.  Now, in the planet's most dire 
hour, Komodo is preparing his armies to march against the surviving 
population.  The situation looks bleak until the arrival of "The 
Newcomer", a.k.a. Ryan Jeffers (Mario Yedidia), an ordinary Earth teen 
who is transported to Tao when he accidentally drowns.  Ryan brings with 
him the fabled "Manuscript of Legend," a book that tells how to defeat 
the dark forces arrayed against Tao.  Unfortunately, Komodo's minions 
steal it from Ryan before he can present it to Tao's quintet of 
defenders, the kangaroo-like "Warriors of Virtue", and their teacher, 
Master Chung (Chao-Li Chi).
     The basic story is a variation on the age-old struggle between good 
and evil, although, in WARRIORS OF VIRTUE, it's heavily leavened with 
mystical and anti-violence messages.  The latter seem rather 
hypocritical, for, although the film hammers home the moral that killing 
is evil, it doesn't have a problem with the concept of applying a 
vicious beating to a foe.  The kung fu battle sequences, while 
choreographed with flair, are often brutal, and the lack of blood only 
makes them seem more sanitized.  
     WARRIORS OF VIRTUE is a little to juvenile to be enjoyable for 
anyone past puberty.  The film, with its shallow symbols (such as a 
cocoon in a jar) and sermonizing, displays little thematic or character 
depth.  The plot is perfunctory and obvious, and the special effects 
used to animate the five partially-animatronic warriors are barely 
adequate.  The set design is impressive, but that doesn't mean much 
amidst all the other woes.  For good measure, a healthy dose of pop 
Chinese mysticism is injected into the script.  This has the unfortunate 
effect of making WARRIORS OF VIRTUE seem like a STAR WARS rip-off, with 
Master Chung taking the Obi-Wan Kenobi role -- teaching his young 
charge, dying in a battle-to-the-death with the Dark Lord, then 
returning as a spirit to give invaluable advice.  
     The movie's most interesting character, a girl named Alyssia 
(Marley Shelton), is criminally underused.  Alyssia is torn between good 
and evil, trapped between the desire to do right and Komodo's seductive 
allure.  She's the only one in the film that we develop any real 
interest in, and the script, apparently unable to deal with a 
personality having the potential to display more than one dimension, 
discards her perfunctorily and inelegantly.  
     The acting in WARRIORS OF VIRTUE can be counted among its most 
serious flaws.  Director Ronnie Yu (THE BRIDE WITH WHITE HAIR), one of 
many Hong Kong film makers migrating to the West, has an excellent 
visual sense, but, at least in this case, he is incapable of culling 
solid performances out of his cast members.  The young lead, Mario 
Yedidia (JACK), is teeth-grindingly awful, displaying a complete 
inability to convey any emotion subtly.  Yedidia's "performance" makes 
you appreciate the quality evident in the work of his many superior 
peers.  Angus Macfadyen (Robert the Bruce in BRAVEHEART) is distinctly 
unimpressive, with a generic, over-the-top style that's more laughable 
than effective.  There's nothing remotely sinister about Komodo -- he 
looks like a rock star in need of a good night's sleep.  Marley Shelton 
and Chao-Li Chi are merely adequate in supporting parts.  I suppose the 
five actors trapped beneath the Warrior costumes deserve some kind of 
recognition for what they endured to lend their creature-characters a 
semblance of life.
     Fantasy films have an extremely poor motion picture history, 
perhaps because it's so difficult for a movie to capture the kind of 
pure magic that exists only in the imagination.  WARRIORS OF VIRTUE is 
an abysmal entry to the genre, and boasts very little to offer any 
audience, young or old.  The film makers probably thought they were 
creating a sort of WIZARD OF OZ for today's generation.  What they ended 
up with is a lot closer to ADULT MUTANT NINJA KANGAROOS.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
