Title
Review for Felice... Felice... (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
 You know the film is a tribute to a bygone era when the whole thing is done
with pictures for backgrounds, and will not take but a handful of external
shots for the duration of the whole film.
 This story is based on pioneering photographer Felice Beato, who went to
Japan to do his work before the 20th century arrived. While there, he took a
woman as a geisha and wife, but as the story develops we find that things
did not work out very well. Several years later, he decides to go back to
Japan to try and see if he can mend things with his wife, O-Kiku, and he
starts his search where they lived. His voyage takes him through many of the
friends that were near him, and some of the subjects that he had
photographed, as well as one student of his. And in the end he gets the
chance to meet his ex-wife, but he has finally realized that  this world,
that may have been so romantic at one time is not for him, and in fact not
for foreigners. They do not help him find her much, and he is getting near
the end of his rope and ready to return home, when a friend's wife comes up
to him and lectures him on his romantic notions, and then tells him where he
can see her one last time.
 What is truly beautiful in this film is the way that is done. Almost
totally done with the photographs that master Beato left behind, it is a
study in an art form that has lost its beauty, an art form that at one time
held much promise. The sets for Nagasaki, and all the cities that he visits
are all seen through the photographs, and the glass prints (positives, today
known as transparencies) a memory of a bygone era and time, when things
appeared so much better than now.
 As we meet people that were once a part of his past, we are also coming to
grips with the fact that Beato has to let go of his past. An older fisherman
he liked, was actually the father of the woman he married, and Beato never
recognized him. The old man tells his story, and it is a sad one, but to no
avail. His loneliness and sadness only increases as Beato fails to recognize
that this man was the father of the woman he married. And later we meet a
prostitute that he had photographed many times, who had always loved him,
but her syphilis is eating her apart and she is nearing the end of her rope.
And here, appears the one series of external shots. A young girl, presumably
this geisha's daughter, wants to leave with him, but he can not take her
with him. For all  the moments in the story, this one sits in our stomachs
the hardest, as the young girl is doomed to become the very same thing that
are all the others in the same house that he is visiting.
 In many ways this is not a film. It really is a sort of slide show, or
photography show, with the people in it secondary to the real picture. The
beauty is in the pictures, no matter how romantic they may be, the reality
is becoming more and more sordid and sad for everyone he had known in his
past. The situation between him and his wife, then, never materialized,
probably because of this westernized notions about love, something that may
have been totally foreign in those days to many girls in Japan.
 A really well directed film, extremely well thought out, and done with such
care and love that it is hard to think of it as bad, or not worthy of
attention. It is not one of those films that has to hit you over the head to
do its thing. It just does it, and you will fall for it along the way.
perhaps a bit slow, but intentionally so, as it gives the major characters a
real nice tone of characterization, so rarely found in many films. Of
special mention is the excellent touch that the old man played by Yoshi
Oida, who turns out to be his ex-wife's father, and Beato never realized it.
 Great conceptual design and attention to detail in this film. Excellent
acting.
