Title
Review for Cry-Baby (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        CRY-BABY is bursting with energy and style.  But, sadly, the
tongue-in-cheek comedy is bereft of originality.  Director John Waters has
his creative juices flowing, but they're not flowing into anything
substantial.
        CRY-BABY is a musical parody of '50s culture, but it lacks the
satirical edge which allowed HAIRSPRAY to gel as a send-up of the early
'60s.  Who needs yet another '50s musical, especially when it has nothing
new to add to the worn-out genre?  CRY-BABY is essentially a noisy and
pointless GREASE rip-off.
        Johnny Depp plays the John Travolta character, a bad boy rock 'n
roll greaser.  Amy Locane plays the Olivia Newton John character, a
goody-two-shoes who falls in love with Depp.  The crisp performances by
Depp and Locane help to compensate for the dated characters, who are as
soggy as corn flakes floating in a swimming pool.
        Waters just doesn't have a compelling story to tell.  The recycled
plot pits snobby squares against ultra-hip juvenile delinquents, an idea
which went sour eight years ago with the release of GREASE 2.  But
fortunately, Waters has assembled a stellar cast.  One off-beat actor after
another parades across the screen.  Ricki Lake co-stars as Depp's very
pregnant sister, who believes a woman's breasts are her best weapon.
Former porn queen Traci Lords plays an oversexed slut; she struts around in
tight, revealing outfits, looking like she stepped straight out of a Russ
Meyer movie.  Patty Hearst, of all people, has a lot of fun playing Lords'
chipper, bright-eyed mother.  Willem Dafoe pops up unexpectedly as a
Juvenile Hall security guard.  Also on hand are Iggy Pop, Troy Donahue,
Joey Heatherton, David Nelson, Mink Stole, Joe Dallesandro, and Polly
Bergen, a cast to end all casts.  The real standout in terms of shock
value, however, is Kim McGuire as Hatchet-Face, a girl so ugly she makes
the mutt in TURNER & HOOCH look like Miss America.
        CRY-BABY is surprisingly tame and restrained for a John Waters
movie, which is one reason it's a let down.  The plot is so light-weight
you kind of hope the director will do something tasteless just to spice
things up.  In CRY-BABY, Waters has replaced outrageous and offensive with
mindless and moronic.
