Title
Review for Vanishing, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Lon Ponschock
     Okay, okay, it hooked me again.  Pretty similar though.  But like
the opening quote says, the devil is in the details.
     Like the two halves of the infinity symbol, VANISHING I and
VANISHING II are two halves, Moebius-like--intertwining very
effectively.  I'm glad I took Greg's advice and saw both.  As a double
bill, these two Vanishings make excellent viewing.
     The scene is changed from Holland to Seattle, the cast is
American.  The director is the same.  Interestingly the women
characters are given more depth in the American version, and more
conventional patterns are shown than in the Dutch version--perhaps a
more personalized view, less objective.  All these things have to do
with the shift in focus in this American version.  Do I sound like I'm
dancing around talking about an actual comparison?  Like the old book
title has it, "I'm dancing as fast as I can."  ;-)
     There is completion in the two works and a balance as well.  It
would be interesting to hear other ideas on these two films.  Not
wanting to provide spoiler remarks, I feel constrained in saying
anything else.
     Do you remember the concluding quote I used for the Dutch version
of THE VANISHING?  It's not too far back, you can find it.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Barney (Jeff Bridges) is an eccentric college professor whose
unstable personality leads him to attempt kidnappings in order to
resolve certain issues about his inner self that he doesn't understand.
While his initial attempts at abduction are failures, he eventually
succeeds with Diane (Sandra Bullock).  Her disappearance drives
boyfriend Jeff into an obsessive frenzy to learn her fate--did she run
out on him after the argument they had shortly before she vanished, or
is there another, more sinister solution to the mystery?
     George Sluizer, the man at the helm for this version of THE
VANISHING, was also the force behind the original 1988 Dutch film.
What happened between the original and this remake is what too often
occurs when Hollywood attempts to meddle with something superlative -
an inferior product is born.  It's surprising, and a little sad, that
Sluizer not only condoned the changes made to the American story, but
championed them.
     The original rendering of THE VANISHING is a tense thriller,
powerful and compelling.  Co-written and directed by Sluizer, it shows
how good a film of this sort can be when it doesn't depend upon
formulas, stock situations, and pre-fabricated characters.  Of course,
some of the credit must go to Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu (the actor who
plays the kidnapper), who manages to create a personality who is at
once creepy, sympathetic, and hateful.
     The remake is nothing if not disappointing.  Although much of the
story follows the original, it's the parts that deviate which hurt the
film.  While Nancy Travis is a fair actress, it's her character of Rita
that singlehandedly destroys the movie's uniqueness.  The
sensationalization of THE VANISHING is painful to watch.
     The transition of the story from Holland to Washington state is a
smooth one.  Whole scenes are left intact, down to the dialogue and
camera angles.  The performers in this THE VANISHING are every bit as
good as their foreign counterparts, and the characters are equally
well-realized.  In the few short minutes they have on screen together,
Sutherland and Bullock manage to mould the Jeff/Diane relationship into
something that the audience can believe.  Likewise, Jeff Bridges'
Barney is as complex as the villain played by Donnadieu.
     Nothing about Rita is good, except perhaps the job done by Nancy
Travis in portraying her.  She is a stock character introduced into the
film simply to "Hollywoodize" the production.  Her relationship with
Jeff is contrived and unbelievable.  Her powers of deduction, which
would make Sherlock Holmes look stupid, are ludicrous.  Unfortunately,
they're also crucial to the resolution of the movie.
     THE VANISHING starts out with an interesting premise, and presents
a good study of two extreme characters (Bridges' deranged Barney and
Sutherland's obsessed Jeff).  However, what begins with promise 
degenerates into a typical stalker film, with an ending that is pat and 
predictable.  Too much of what is good about the original THE VANISHING 
has been taken out, and the material added to replace it is sub-par.  On
the whole, this isn't a particularly good movie.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
*THE VANISHING*:  Suspenseful "missing person" action/mystery
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        Diane vanishes without a trace from an interstate rest
stop in Washington State.  Her boyfriend searches for her for years
(time-lapsed, this is not a slow movie), meets the waitress Rita and
tries to get on with his life but can't let go, and goes on TV to beg
whoever took Diane to meet with him to tell him what happened.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Kiefer Southerland is fine as the boyfriend.  Jeff
Bridges is okay as creepy Barney but has an inexplicably goofy accent
(blame it on the director?).  It is Nancy Travis, as Rita, that makes
this movie succeed.  She's no Sarah Connor (T2's Uzi-toting,
sculpted-muscles waitress), but this admirable, believable and *smart*
heroine got the audience rooting and cheering for her.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Some difficult scenes fairly well shot.
SCORE/SOUND:  pretty good, sort of jazzy in places
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Shovel fight.  Not much gore, but realistic
boinging sounds and one mercifully short somewhat gross still shot.
Some curses, nothing not on TV.
*SOMMERSBY*:  Post-Civil War "missing person returns" drama
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        Jack Sommersby returns to his wife and farm in Tennessee -- or
does he really?  -- after being shut up in the Yankee prisoner-of-war
camp in Elmira, New York for most of the War Between the States.  His
efforts to restore the family farm and fortune after the devastation of
the war, and make a new start with his wife and son, are complicated by
a Tennessee version of the Klan (angered by his promise to sell off his
land to black as well as white sharecroppers after paying off the
mortgage on the farm), his wife's ex-suitor who had worked the farm in
hopes of marrying the grass widow, and accusations that he is not who he
claims to be.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Richard Gere is natural and charming as Jack, and
Jodi Foster (Laurel Sommersby) excels as ever at unspoken conversations,
but is perhaps a bit melodramatic in a few of her spoken lines near the
end (again, blame it on the director?).  James Earl Jones has a small
but pronounced part as a judge (implausible, but this is a Hollywood
movie, though it rises above that at various times in the movie).
Although not as over-the-top as his performance in "Sneakers", I will
repeat my suggestion from my previous review: "James!  Stop these cameos
and get a real role!"
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Most evocative of my roots since FRIED GREEN
TOMATOES.  Beautiful scenery and interesting scenes of tobacco-farming.
I avoided most of those films about farmers a few years back, but this
movie had just enough to communicate some of the problems of farm life
while advancing the plot, but didn't drag on interminably about them,
sort of like the barn-raising sequences in *Witness*.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  A little foreplay (clothed)
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Fighting, short shot of a man's whipped back.
Some slurs against blacks uttered by the Klansmen (Knights of the White
Chameleon).
ANALYSIS:  Why did I like both of these movies better than their foreign
originals (THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE, with Gerard Depardieu in Richard
Gere's role, and THE VANISHING, a Dutch film), even though it could be
said that the originals were more tightly plotted and did not have the
error of tending a few times towards melodrama?  Because the originals
didn't give me any reasons to care what happened to any of its
characters, and the remakes did.  Also, SOMMERSBY added interesting
sub-plots, and THE VANISHING ('93) had some surprising twists.
- Sarah (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Author
Nick Jarecki
     What starts out with an intense psychological build-up ends with
a pathetic anti-climax, making you walk away from the movie hating it.
     The hero of our story is Jeff, a troubled guy looking for his
girlfriend.  Capably played by Keifer Sutherland, Jeff spends the movie
looking for his girlfriend Dianne, who vanished from a shopping mart
after having an argument with him.  I love Keifer Sutherland and must
say that he does give a performance that really makes the movie hold
together....  However, the writer did not give him an easy time and Keif
has to do a lot of work to make this happen
     The heroine of our story is Rita played by Nancy Travis.  This
women is an extremely good--yet extremely unknown--actress who
essentially makes the movie.  Her character is selfish and somewhat
bitchy however she saves our friend Jeff from his demise by being buried
alive!!!  (I told you SPOILER!)
     The villain is Barney, shittily played by Jeff Bridges.  You go
through the movie hating Barney (not 'cause your supposed to, just
'cause his character is so weak--not to mention the shitty performance
by JB).  He is psychotic and stupid and has a lust for putting peole in
boxes and suffocating them (i.e., Buried Alive!!!).
     The thing that pisses me off about this movie is the ending....
There is a big buildup with Barney saying, "You have to experience
everything that Dianne experienced from this moment forward...."  Oooh!
I thought it would be some intricate little thang....  Instead it's just
being drugged unconscious and being put in a box to die from suffocation.
Barney says this was the worst thing he could imagine.  I can imagine a
lot worse things than that!

Author
Tanja Rosteck
     Well, I caught the opening of THE VANISHING last night.  I haven't
seen the original European film yet, but I imagine it's infinitely :^)
better than this Hollywood remake.
     I found the characters to be flat, without substance, especially
Barney (Jeff Bridges).  Perhaps the whole point of his character was
that you weren't *supposed* to understand it, but if that was the
director's intention, it certainly wasn't successful.  
     The first two-thirds of the movie were incredibly slow--not the
good kind of slow, where you can feel the tension building for the
movie's climax, but the bad kind of slow, where you just sit back and
have to say, "God, get on with it, will you?"
     The relationship between Rita, the waitress, and Jeff was also
completely without substance.  There was no chemistry between them
whatsoever, and although I wasn't quite sure how long they had been
involved before moving in together, the way they related to each other
was like complete strangers.  Again, perhaps this was intentional, since
it was necessary to the plot for Jeff to keep his big secret from her,
but it also wasn't successful.
     The role of Barney's family was pretty unnecessary, except that
there had to be a daughter so that the ending could turn out the way it
did.  Apart from that, there was almost no point in introducing them in
the first place.  There was potential there, however, to have his family
play a more important and developed role, especially with regards to
what motivated Barney to commit his crimes, and especially go to with
the "go past the edge" theme.  But again, no development here, and the
"what's the point?" feeling came back.
     But the worst part had to be the ending.  Apart from being
gratuitously bloody and revengeful, it was completely predictable, very
Hollywood.  What really got me at the end was that Jeff, having gotten
out of his burial box with the help of Rita and having killed
(presumably) Barney, simply looked at a nearby mound (coffin-shaped
mound, like his was), assumed that it was Diane that was buried there,
and looked relieved.  I couldn't quite grasp this.  Here he had spent the
past three or four years looking for Diane, not knowing anything about
how she vanished, where she was, whether she was alive or dead, and how
she had died (if she had), and the "not-knowing" was supposed to be the
driving force of his life up until that point.  He also knows that
Barney had tried to capture other women.  So, it could have been anyone
buried in that mound--why didn't Jeff look, just to be sure?  Wouldn't it
rest his conscience, as well as relieve his curiosity, to just dig up
the mound and make sure it *was* her?  I think that if they had done that,
it would also have cemented the ending of the movie.  (But that's
another Hollywood thing--you always have to leave room for a sequel.)
     On the positive side, the music was great (especially the requisite
"thriller music" during the scary parts), and the scenery of Washington
State was also fabulous.  I think it would have been much more effective
had the gas station/ MiniMart been in a really remote section of
highway, with forests and mountains all around, to give a real sense of
"vanishing into nowhere."  Where she *did* vanish in the movie was
pretty populated--one McDonalds, a Dairy Queen, plus a couple of gas
stations and *lots* of people around.  Too much hustle and bustle to be
effective.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Tanja Rosteck  --  Concordia University, Montreal, K-bec, Canada
E-mail         --  ts_rost@pavo.concordia.ca
