Title
Review for Mina Tannenbaum (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Peer Wandel Hansen
   The story is situated in Paris in the period from 1958 to present    
day, where we follow the friendship between the two main characters Mina
(Romane Bohringer) and Ethel (Elsa Zylberstein).  Mina and Ethel are born
the same day in the same hospital, but meet for the first time as six   
years old in the ballet institute where they are taking lessons.        
   The movie now take us into the teenage years and their first         
experiences with love, and their friendship grows stronger but their    
personality grow more and more apart.  The two girls become each others  
ideal, even though they approach life different.  Mina is artistic and   
has the courage to do what she believe in, where Ethel in contrast takes
life less serious and live from day to day.  As the movie approaches and 
the girls get older the differences become larger.                      
     This is one of the most brilliant French movies I have seen in a
while.  I will especially emphasize the manuscript as fabulous, and it
received the "Palme d'Or" price in Cannes in 1994.  This is only the
second movie from Martine Dugowson (according to The Movie database at
Cardiff) and is show some experimenting with light and cutting We see
inspiration from David Lynch (Wild at Heart) with close-up of a
cigarette being lit.  The main characters, Romane Bohringer and Elsa
Zylberstein play they parts astounding.
   Martine Dugowson describe the move as a mix between a comedy and 
a Western.  Westerns because they often are centered around a strong,
unbreakable friendship between two widely different individuals.  I  
highly recommend this movie, and I'm looking forward to see what the
writer/director will bring us next time.                            
