Title
Review for Charade (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those people who are familiar with old movies often complain
about the present-day state of cinema, especially Hollywood,
which looks much worse than in Good Old Days. Nostalgia and
natural tendency among humans to view past days and years
through rose- coloured glasses often lead them to conclude
that the quality of films in general used to be much better
than it is today. So, in that way, old decades look like
Golden Age when characters, stars and movies used to be
Larger Than Life, and their success owed more to the virtues
like charm, talent and hard work instead of publicity
campaigns. This is especially so when the old movie
connoisseurs compare certain average examples of certain
genres with their classic counterparts. The difference in
quality becomes especially striking in the case of
light-hearted comedies with a romantic flavour. One of such
classic examples, although not romantic comedy in strict
sense, is CHARADE, 1963 film by Stanley Donen, extremely
entertaining piece of cinema which is often referenced as
the "Best Hitchcock film Hitchock never made".
Heroine of this film is Regina "Reggie" Lampert (played by
Audrey Hepburn), UNESCO translator who goes through some
rather rough period in her life. While on vacation in Megeve
she had decided to divorce her husband Charles, feeling
estranged after years of unsuccessful attempts to find
anything about his background or source of his fortune. When
she returns to Paris, her home is emptied of all possessions
and Charles has disappeared. Police inspector Granpierre
(played by Jacques Marin) brings another bad news - Charles
has converted all his (and Regina's) belongings to cash and
tried to leave the country, only to be killed on the train.
The money is gone, presumably taken by the killer, but that
doesn't concern three menacing characters - Tex Panthollow
(played by James Coburn), Herman Scobie (played by George
Kennedy) and Leopold Gideon (played by Ned Glass) - who
visit Regina and demand 250,000 US$, apparently owed to them
by her late husband. Regina would like to pay them, but she
doesn't have a clue where the money should be. On the other
hand, CIA agent Hamilton Barthollomew (played by Walter
Matthau) is also interested in the money, because it used to
belong to US government until it was stolen by Charles and
his comrades during the covert operation behind enemy lines
in WW2. Three men who harass Regina were apparently Charles'
partners in the scheme, who got themselves swindled by their
comrade. But this revelation is hardly comforting to Regina,
who remains fearful for her life. Thankfully, charming and
suave businessman Peter Joshua (played by Cary Grant) is
always there to save her from unpleasant situations and
offer assistance, but Regina gradually begins suspecting his
true motives.
In this day and age, any plot containing cynical widow,
large stash of stolen money and multitude of menacing or
double-crossing characters determined to get their hands on
it, would probably be most suitable for low budget
Tarantinoesque farce with tons of black humour, graphic
violence and thousands shouted obscenities. However, Peter
Stone wrote his script in a more enlightened, kinder and
gentler era of moviemaking. Humour in CHARADE might look
macabre at times, but in general the film is very light, at
least for today's standards. Characters are simple but
effective, with actors - especially supporting cast led by
Coburn and Kennedy - making them colourful without heavy-
handed attempts to make them cool. But the greatest
contribution to the lightheartedness of CHARADE was probably
given by director Stanley Donen. Filmmaker who had made his
reputation by filming classic musicals in 1950s like SINGIN'
IN THE RAIN and SEVEN BRIDES FOR SEVEN BROTHERS,
successfully adapted his directing skills to the new genre,
and also added his own tendency to make the material as
light- hearted as possible. Donen, on the other hand, also
learned a thing or two from the masters of the genre. Major
element of the plot - ordinary person in extraordinary
situation - looks very Hitchcockian, as well as the fight
scene on the Parisian rooftop, probably intended as humorous
homage to the similar scene in NORTH BY NORTHWEST. Some
critics also found many links between CHARADE and early Bond
films, including effective teaser scene, little flavour of
international intrigue and exotic Parisian setting.
But the most memorable element of CHARADE is not the plot or
elaborate scenes. This film owes its reputation to its
leading stars, acting legends that look like deities and
represent movie equivalent of the age when giant walked the
earth. On one hand we have Audrey Hepburn, embodiment of
Class among Hollywood female stars. Her slender, almost
anorexic figure, combined with girlish looks and manners of
aristocratic adult, allows her to turn Reggie Lampert as one
of the most memorable characters in the history of romantic
comedy. Her "damsel in distress" routine is nicely
illustrated with few deliberate scenes of overacting,
intended to keep the lightheartedness of the movie in few
dark and macabre scenes. (One of the elements of Reggie's
character - career in UNESCO - gives a prophetic dimension
to this film, considering Hepburn's real life work for UN in
late years). opposite is Cary Grant, another Hollywood
legend who also built reputation by playing charming and
suave characters in romantic comedies. In this film he uses
script opportunity to play not one, but many variations of
the same character, additionally entertaining the viewers by
making them guess his true alignment (and that game
continues until the very last shot of the film). But the
true strength of Hepburn's and Grant's performances is in
their interaction - all murder, mayhem and international
intrigue that goes around their characters represents
nothing more than one giant Macguffin-like obstacle in their
romantic path. On the other hand, their exchanges, although
always amusing, at times seem a little bit distracting and
unnecessarily lengthen the film. Few screen couples had so
much chemistry between them and CHARADE is therefore one of
the most effective and entertaining romantic comedies.
Finally, another memorable element of this film is musical
theme by Henry Mancini, the author who would later become
legend by producing music for Blake Edwards films.
All in all, CHARADE is an excellent piece of classic
Hollywood entertainment, somewhat overlooked by present day
audience, but nevertheless a splendid product of bygone era
of filmmaking.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
