Title
Review for Year of the Comet (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Penelope Ann Miller plays Margaret Harwood, a savvy wine expert who has
had to fight to be given any responsibility in her faily's fine wine
business.  The first serious task she is given is to travel to a castle on
the Isle of Skye and to inventory the castle's wine cellar her father has
purchased.  The good news is that the cellar turns out to have the most
valuable wine bottle in the world--not to mention one of the biggest.  It is
a three-foot tall bottle of Chateau Lafitte from 1811, the "Year of the
Comet."  Unfortunately, the castle also houses a comic-book-style villain
Philippe (played by Louis Jourdan) who is doing something scientific and
evil elsewhere in the castle.  Soon also on hand at the castle is Oliver
Plexico, the agent of the purchaser of the wine bottle.  Based on one
previous experience, Margaret finds Oliver to be just about the most
obnoxious man in the world.  Guess who she has to have as an ally in her
escape from the clutches of Philippe.
     I have to admit being anxious to see this film from the moment I heard
the story and screenplay were by William Goldman.  Goldman is probably best
known for THE PRINCESS BRIDE, but he also has been responsible for the
novels and screenplays of NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY, MARATHON MAN, and MAGIC.
He also wrote the screenplays for BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, THE
GREAT WALDO PEPPER, ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN, and A BRIDGE TOO FAR.  His name
almost guarantees good writing.  Almost.  This is way below par Goldman with
flat uninteresting heroes and far-fetched villains.  The film was directed
by Peter Yates (BULLITT, BREAKING AWAY, THE DEEP, THE FRIENDS OF EDDIE
COYLE), who claims to have had in mind a Cary Grant/Grace Kelly sort of
adventure with younger stars.  Unfortunately, Ms. Miller is no Grace Kelly
and Tim Daly as Plexico is even further from Cary Grant.  The action is more
predictable than exciting.  The scenery does add a little needed gloss.
Scotland is certainly beautiful and Southern France at least looks pleasant.
But as romantic thrillers go, YEAR OF THE COMET is warm beer.  I rate it a 0
on the -4 to +4 scale.
