Title
Review for Perfect Weapon, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg A. Hooten
     First of all, let's get one thing straight: martial arts films are
not in the same league with major motion/action pictures.  There is, for
some reason, a lack of large budgets, good writers, and great actors who
can do both martial arts, and emotion.  Those actors who know martial
arts and have been in the business for a long time (James Caan, etc.)
have no desire to do martial arts films.  So, let's look at the scale of
stardom here.  I rate ENTER THE DRAGON as four-star, not for its plot,
or its great fight scenes, but because it did more than any other film
for its day.  Bruce was dynamic on film, and was great in his motion.
ABOVE THE LAW was a one-star, no range of emotion, the same techniques
were repeated over and over and over...  .
     That being said, I liked THE PERFECT WEAPON.  Not because Jeff
Speakman (the staring role) was such a great actor, or had a great range
of emotion, or that the film was non-stop action from start to finish.
It was none of these things.  Although Mr. Speakman is a credible
actor, he is certainly better at emoting than Seagal, he is not in the
league of top-billed actors, but then again, he never claims to be.  He
claims he can act, and he can.  Enough said.  
     What I did like about the movie was the little things, the one
liner that Jeff pulls off.  Unlike Seagal's badder-than-all attitude,
Speakman tries to deal with the fact that he doesn't want to kill
people, though he still does.  
     I like the kid who helps him.  He is a more natural actor, and
helps the movie.  He is not just a foil who constantly gets in the way
or into trouble.  
     No one in this movie seemed incompetent.  Many movies have some
dumb cop who cannot get untangled from his own limbs to get an arrest,
not here.  
     Speakman gets *bruised*!  He gets hit, and then has a bruise that
lasts.  I thought bruises went away in ten minutes.  
     He is "The Perfect Weapon," not because he is so good, only because
he is an outsider.  Most movies would have made it because he is
invincible.  
     He loses a fight to low odds.  It is not ten to one where he loses,
granted, I was curious how he could get kicked so many time and not go
down, but goes down to this one attack, but hey, he does go down.  
     Okay, the script is predictable, there are no surprises.  You see
the ending long before it happens, it is obvious.  But I like the way he
moved, the way he hit, and kept hitting until all opponents were down.
No attacker waits until a previous attacker is beaten until he attacks,
all attacks seem very realistic.  
     A look at the movie.  This is a revenge movie, essentially a
troubled kid is placed in Kenpo training to teach him to control his
anger.  After years of training and a falling out with his father, he
meets up with his old Oriental friend who got him into karate when he
was young.  The man (played by Mako) is in trouble with the Korean mafia
and is killed by Tanaka (his real last name, and character name).  The
movie follows Speakman trying to unravel who did it and get revenge for
his friends death.  
     Most predictable.  But all in all, a good movie.  I will give it
two stars.  A workman first effort with a little too much commercialism
on the Kenpo name, but also good choreographed fight scenes that need
closer scrutiny under slow-mo and stop action.  
