Title
Review for Dial M for Murder (1954)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Alfred Hitchcock.  Written by Frederick Knott.  Starring Grace
Kelly, Ray Milland, and Robert Cummings.  1954, 107 min., Not Rated.
     Of the three films Grace Kelly starred in that were directed by Alfred
Hitchcock, "Dial M for Murder" is the most bizarre.  Tony Wendice (Ray Milland)
is a former tennis player who is married to wealthy Margot (Kelly), who only
has eyes for Mark Halliday (Robert Cummings), a mystery novelist.  Tony knows
about their long-distance affair, carried on primarily through written
correspondence, as Mark lives in America and the Wendice's in England, and Tony
is also in need of Margot's money.  For quite some time he has been planning
what he thinks will be the perfect crime, but his plans go awry and Margot ends
up accused of murder.
     The plot is not what distinguishes "Dial M for Murder" from the
suspense-filled exercise in identified voyeurism that is "Rear Window," or the
stylized romantic mystery "To Catch a Thief," (1954 and 1955, respectively). 
The script, written by Frederick Knott from his own hit play, has an unusually
detached atmosphere.  We see what is happening, but are never given a reason to
care one way or another.  The ending is never in doubt, and the three principal
characters have no redeeming qualities.  Yet there is a precision to the
dialogue that makes it all highly engrossing.  
     Hitchcock's signature cameo comes in the form of his appearance on a
picture taken at Tony's class reunion, there was little opportunity for him to
appear on the streets or what not, as the camera rarely ventures outdoors, and
when it does it is never for very long.  In addition to the expected
interesting shots, there is a wonderful sequence in which the events of
Margot's trial are not shown; we hear some of the things that were said but all
that is visible in Margot's reaction.  It should also be noted that the clothes
she wears become darker throughout the course of the movie, a nice symbolic
touch.  Kelly and Milland give great performances; Cummings does not fare so
well.  His acting is unnatural and the role of Mark would have benefited from
better casting.  With Anthony Dawson (as Lesgate) and John Williams
(outstanding as Chief Inspector Hubbard). Cinematography by Robert Burks.     
