Title
Review for Amy Fisher: My Story (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
99 min., not rated, Drama, 1992, Made-for-television
Director: Bradford May
Cast: Noelle Parker, Ed Marinaro, Boyd Kestner, Pierrette Grace,
      Lawrence Dane, Kate Lynch, Kathleen Laskey
     I am sure that everybody has heard the story by now, but will
briefly go over it just in case somebody missed it.  Long Island
teenager Amy Fisher (Noelle Parker) met Joe Buttafucco (Ed Marinaro),
who worked at an autobody shop.  Fisher and Buttafucco started to have an
affair with, in the end, will have Fisher attempting to kill Joe
Buttafucco's wife so she can have Joe to herself.
     AMY FISHER: MY STORY is the first of three television films that
are being aired about the Amy Fisher story.  AMY FISHER: MY STORY is
told from the side of Amy Fisher.  The film is supposedly based on facts
as stated by Amy Fisher.  How much of the film is fact and how much is
fiction, I don't know, but the film makes good watching.  This film was
very well done and even if very little is actual fact, I enjoyed
watching it.  On a scale of zero to five, I give AMY FISHER: MY STORY a
four.
     After the Amy Fisher story became known in May of '92, three of the
four major television networks rushed to film the story first.  NBC won,
with this film, the other two networks ABC, with BEYOND CONTROL: THE AMY
FISHER STORY starring Drew Barrymore, and CBS, with CASUALTIES OF LOVE:
THE 'LONG ISLAND LOLITA' STORY starring Alyssa Milano, will be airing
theirs on the same night a week after NBC ran this film.  I will attempt
to view the other versions as well and do reviews on them.
     The actors and actresses in the film do a good job.  Noelle Parker
(ERNEST SAVES CHRISTMAS, TWISTED) does an exceptionable job as Amy
Fisher.  As well as doing such a good job, Parker looks more like Amy
Fisher than the other two actresses that have been picked.  Her
performance as Amy Fisher was completely convincing, and the backbone to
the film.  Ed Marinaro gives an outstanding performance as Joe
Buttafucco.  Even though his character is a complete sleaze, Marinaro's
performance gives him some humanity.
     The film seems rather well written.  However, from what I have read
in articles and heard on the news, Amy Fisher was not exactly as she was
written.  She evidently had more bad habits than the film showed, but
the film might have been trying to be nice to her (it is giving her side
of the story).
