Title
Review for Killing Yard, The (2001) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE KILLING YARD" (Showtime TV)
On September 9, 1971, 1200 inmates of New York's Attica State Penitentiary
seized control of the prison in a violent, bloody riot, taking many hostages. On
September 13, under orders by Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, guards stormed the
facility and restored order. Their massacre, an unprecedented barrage of gunfire
lasted six minutes, and the police acknowledged having fired no less than 2200
lethal rounds. Until Waco, and with the exception of the Indian massacres in the
late 19th century, this assault was the most brutal one-day confrontation
between Americans since the Civil War. This story focuses on what happened after
the raid as the prosecutor (Larry Day) and district attorney (Christopher
Heyerdahl) pin many of the alleged murders on an inmate named Shango (Morris
Chestnut), a self-educated, if paranoid, "jailhouse lawyer." The prosecution
strategy involves intimidation, innuendo, guilt by association and character
defamation of witnesses. Shango is defended by an aging, ailing attorney (Alan
Alda) and his assistant (Rose McGowan), an Attica Defense Fund volunteer, whose
dogged determination to prove that no hostages were killed by inmates made this
a landmark legal case. It's a classic courtroom tug-of-war, an intellectual
chess match, monitored by a fair and impartial Judge (Tony Nardi). In 1976, Gov.
Hugh Carey issued a blanket pardon for everyone involved and sealed New York
records concerning Attica for 50 years and, in January, 2000, New York State
agreed to a $12 million settlement for inmates and their lawyers.` On the
Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Killing Yard" is a significant
7. It premieres on Sunday, Sept. 23rd at 8 p.m. but - be warned - there are
scenes of extreme brutality and bloodshed.
