Title
Review for Audrey Rose (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Robert Wise has been responsible for a number of classic 
sci-fi/horror/fantasy films in his time.  If any directorial trademark 
could link them together then it would have to be his restrained, 
intelligent approach to the material.  AUDREY ROSE is among the least 
seen of his efforts but I find it resonates more effectively than his 
other classics - it conveys a sense of despair I haven't discovered in 
most other horror films.  Actually, it's probably unfair to label this 
as a horror film, but the fact that it centers around a 'possessed' 
child pretty much seals its fate.  John Beck and Marsha Mason are the 
parents of a girl (twelve-year old Susan Swift, in her debut) who 
attracts the interest of Anthony Hopkins.  It turns out that Hopkins is 
convinced that the soul of his dead daughter has transmigrated into 
Swift's body, although it's not clear why the girl should relive panic 
attacks of her previous life at about the time that Hopkins shows up 
(her first moments of 'rebirth' take place in her bedroom, which is 
bathed in an embryonic pink light).  Premise sounds simple, but opens up 
a wealth of possibilities, touching on themes like identity, ownership, 
parenthood, and of course, life after death.  Most strongly it addresses 
the issue of loss - in many ways this is mainly a story about child 
custody.  When Mason watches her daughter overtaken by hysteria, she is 
horrified, but the expression on her face doesn't change when Hopkins 
steps in and calms the girl down - she sees that her daughter is 
becoming his daughter.  Her husband (Beck) is even more upset, coming to 
blows with Hopkins and warning him to stay away from his family.  Swift 
(who gives a convincing performance throughout) is the helpless pawn in 
the middle of this mess, shuffled between hospitals, schools, and one 
'parent' to another.  To top it off, the whole thing ends in a 
courtroom.  
Since this story is treated so rationally (Hopkins speaks softly and 
calmly throughout the entire film) any pseudo-supernatural elements come 
across as concessions to the film's inevitable 'horror' label (e.g.  
Swift's irrational attraction to a ritual pyre built in her school 
playground).  But where Wise and his young star really excel is in the 
final scene, which, unlike nearly all other horror films, requires no 
dramatic sets or special effects.  Swift is mesmerising as she undergoes 
hypnosis and revisits past memories in her subconscious.  Screenwriters 
Joe Wizan and  Frank De Felitta (who adapted his novel) include many 
provocative moments.  Single parents who have lost children in 
litigation will probably find this uncomfortable viewing.  Ending of 
film, though viewed positively, is nonetheless depressing.   

