Title
Review for Vidimo se (1995) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Sorrow, disdain and repulsion are the emotions that critics 
usually felt after watching almost any Croatian film made in 
1990s. Unlike Serbia, where war, economic ruin and 
authoritarian regime didn't seem to affect filmmakers' 
creativity, Croatian filmmakers constantly failed to rise 
above those limitations. Reason for that can be found in the 
state being the only source of finances for dying film 
industry, which resulted in contents of those films being 
more or less synchronised with the rigid nationalist 
ideology of President Tudjman and his ruling party. This was 
especially evident in films that dealt with 1991-95 war in 
Croatia and almost always offered one-sided, simplistic view 
of that conflict and often degenerated into cheap propaganda 
that turned Goebbels into master of subtlety. However, 
mostly thanks to Ivo Stivicic, one of the more liberal 
managers of Croatian state television, there were some 
titles that managed to bend those rules and offer somewhat 
grittier and more realistic view of the war that would later 
haunt Croatia to this day. Among them the most celebrated 
was VIDIMO SE, 1995 television drama written and directed by 
Ivan Salaj. 
The plot revolves about five young men who used to be best 
childhood friends. In summer of 1981 they spend idyllic time 
in the woods and make a solemn promise to bury each other in 
their favourite spot. Ten years later newly independent 
Croatia is fighting desperate war against Serb rebels backed 
by Serb-dominated military of former Yugoslavia. It is 
Autumn, city of Vukovar has fallen, Croatian morale is at 
all-time low and another conflict - between 
government-controlled National Guard and extreme right- wing 
militia HOS - threatens to increase the bloodshed. Five 
friends meet again- first one is studying in Germany in 
order to avoid draft, second is guilt-stricken for not 
volunteering to fight, third is an heroin addict and fourth 
Maks (played by Goran Visnjic), member of HOS, obviously 
unable to accommodate himself to civilian life. The fifth 
member of the group was recently killed in action, and his 
funeral is the reason for their reunion. After re-evaluating 
their own lives and thinking about idyllic past and 
uncertain future, four friends decide to honour their 
childhood pledge. 
Ivan Salaj spent some time on the front with a camera, and 
the result of his efforts, HOTEL SUNJA, is one of the best 
documentaries that dealt with the wars of former Yugoslavia. 
Because of seeing the war and its destructive effects first 
hand, Salaj knew what this film was all about and, 
therefore, refused to follow the rules of Croatian 1990s war 
films. In Salaj's film, the war of 1991-95 is presented less 
a heroic struggle between good and evil and more as a sum of 
individual tragedies, the worst of them all being the loss 
of innocence. In this film the picture of Croatia is 
extremely bleak - entire generation is doomed; uncertain 
future awaits those who won't be killed in war or fall prey 
to drugs, alcohol or PTSP and they are going to forever be 
haunted by seeing their childhood dreams shattered in most 
brutal way imaginable. The only way for protagonists of this 
film to justify their existence is through rebellion that 
manifests itself in action against spiritual (cursing God) 
or mundane authority (embodied in police). 
Sincerity of its author, as well as an excellent way in he 
reconstructed the bleak atmosphere with meagre financial 
resources at his disposal - all that makes VIDIMO SE into 
one of the best films produced in 1990s Croatia. Because of 
that, even some major flaws can be forgiven. One of those 
flaws - bad direction of few action scenes - can be 
explained with the low budget. The other - terrible acting - 
is something that is common to almost any 1990s Croatian 
film. The only exception comes in the form of Goran Visnjic 
(of later ER fame) who simply radiates charisma as socially 
challenged black-clad stormtrooper. Although there were 
better films made in 1990s Croatia, VIDIMO SE is 
nevertheless one of the most important. Whenever someone 
asks what was Croatia 1991 really like, this film is going 
to provide part of the answer. Unfortunately, judging by the 
way the recent events are unfolding, millions of people in 
the rest of the world might very easily find to have a lot 
in common with the characters of VIDIMO SE. 
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax 
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
