Title
Review for Sukeban Deka (1995) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Violent and bizarrely entertaining anime, part 21 JUMP STREET
and part Russ Meyer, that somehow works despite its limitations.
        SUKEBAN: n., Jap., "bad girl".
        DEKA: n., Jap., slang for policeman, "cop"; possible
corruption/contraction of English "detective".
I tried to imagine SUKEBAN DEKA as live-action, and somehow I wound up
with the blueprint for a Russ Meyer movie, Meyer, king of American
Sixties exploitation cinema, would probably have loved to direct a
picture about a teenage ex-con who beats up juvenile delinquents and
assorted upper-tax-bracket scumbags with a yo-yo. I am not leaving out
very much here. And yet I watched SUKEBAN DEKA with a crooked smile;
it's a perversely entertaining movie that, if it HAD been live-action,
might not even have worked.
The plot: Saki Asamiya is a juvenile convict who is given a shot at
freedom by the police. Theyt want to infiltrate a private high school
overrun with crime, and she makes a good mole: fast with her fists and
good-looking. Saki eventually takes the assignment, but only under
duress, and every scene she's in has her under pressure from one
direction or another. Aside from the yo-yo (they can't give her a gun),
she has a sidekick of sorts -- a dippy fellow named Sanpei who latches
onto her like a barnacle, and has his head shaved to prove his devotion
to her. (This leads us to one of the best lines in the picture: "If you
don't stop hanging off me like crap out of a carp's butt, I'll beat you
senseless!" Sanpei, however, takes this as an invitation to S&M, and is
even more turned on.)
Movies like this either work or they don't, and most of the reason they
work is style. SUKEBAN DEKA has its over-the-top-ness right about 80% of
the time. One of the evil girls in the story wears cammo fatigues
underneath her negligee; another dresses like a walking bondage
outfitter's ad and hides snakes in her cleavage. (The fetish for snakes
bleeds over into the intercollary images that flash up between scenes:
when someone gets double-crossed, we see flash shots of one snake
sinking its fangs into the other.) One fight is punctuated with a
passing train, which conveniently hides all the screams.
But there are parts of the story where the plot is just stretched too
thin, and could have used some extra writing -- maybe even some
over-writing. There's a whole brainwashing subplot that surfaces about
two-thirds of the way through, which feels suspiciously plastered on, as
if the scriptwriters were desperate for something to spin things in a
new direction. Also, Saki's enemies -- three sisters who control the
school's illegal activities -- are also patchy: the most villanous of
the bunch is not really the most memorable, and vice versa. A little
more work in this department, and they would really have had something
here. As it stands, it's not bad at all, just limited and inconsistent.
FOOTNOTE: Part of the reason for the patchiness of the story may be its
source material. SUKEBAN DEKA was adapted from a manga which ran for
eight years and twelve volumes, and the movie borrows its story from the
first and part of the second volumes. Shinji Wada, the original writer
and artist, had a hand in the production and the script, but there's
still been a great deal of condensation and collapsing. I went back and
read the entire series myself -- the scope of the whole story is
staggering, to put it mildly -- and can see why they might have had
trouble packing even the first story into a two-hour movie.
