Title
Review for Bloodfist VI: Ground Zero (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Cold War missile silo, terrorists, unsuspecting postman who
must take out the bad guys
Stars:
Downplayed by the media during his kickboxer days Japanese-American Don
"the Dragon" Wilson is arguably kickboxing's greatest champ. Wilson was
world champ for 12 consecutive years. He held ten world titles, and
vanquished 15 national champions and 11 world champions (he even
traveled to Thailand, and defeated the Thai champ to become that
country's number one Thai boxer).  Surprisingly, "the Dragon" had no
martial arts experience prior to high school graduation; he was an honor
student with engineering aspirations.
Wilson's primary style is Pai Lum (Dragon Style kung fu), mainly a
kicking art but he has cross-trained extensively. He rarely blocks, and
will take an opponent's kick on his elbow, then use his right roundhouse
leg as a jabbing weapon to methodically open his opponent's defenses for
body punches and well-timed kicks. On film Wilson is proficient in all
kicks and excels in the spinning crescent. His wariness and instinctive
follow through after strikes imparts convincing realism to his fight
scenes.
Cat Sassoon: Catya ("Cat") Sassoon is the daughter famous hair stylist
Vidal Sassoon and actress Beverly Adams. According to a May 28, 1997
interview article with Ellen Fitz-Patrick of FAIR LADY (an
English-language woman's magazine in South Africa) Ms. Sassoon learned
tae kwon do for self defense after a brutal assault at age 14 left her
hospitalized. 
Synopsis:
In this B-grade movie version of the "Diehard" formula (hapless
adventurer wanders into a space that has been taken over by scheming
terrorists) Don "the Dragon" Wilson is Nick Corrigan, a gentle Air Force
courier carrying mail for the shift workers at a nuclear weapons launch
site in Ellsworth. As Corrigan's jeep rolls down the desert highway, a
radio dispatcher barks, "Chop chop, Corrigan. Don't get lost on us
again, you idiot." But as luck would have it, the hapless Corrigan stops
to help an injured roadside animal and arrives 1.5 hours late. This is
fortunate, since his presence is not anticipated by fanatical terrorists
who have hijacked the missile site.  When the site defenses are
activated, Corrigan becomes trapped inside and is the only survivor in a
position to stop the terrorists. Fortunately humble Corrigan knows
martial arts. Cat Sassoon plays one of the bad guys.
Opinion: 
Executive Producer Roger Corman (who is referred to by fans as "King of
the B Movies") produced this movie, so I knew enough to expect B grade
acting and perhaps a low budget. Luckily acting wasn't important in this
movie, as it concentrated mostly on action: gun battles, and hand to
hand combat in accordance with a good and exciting story line.  The
fight choreography under Art Camacho was okay; although combatants
hesitated a few hundredths of a second between strikes rather than
throwing consecutive combinations, it wasn't that noticeable. If you are
an action fan, and you have a Saturday afternoon to kill, this video is
fun, and will do nicely.
