Title
Review for Born in East L.A. (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     When you head "Cheech Marin," you don't think "romantic comedy with a
message," but believe it or not, that's what BORN IN EAST L.A. is.  Yes,
there are drugs, but Cheech isn't doing them (he accidentally meets up with
a couple of drug smugglers).  (Maybe it has something to do with the absence
of Thomas Chong, Cheech's long-time partner.)  So what is this RARA AVIS,
this "family-oriented" Cheech Marin movie?
     BORN IN EAST L.A. is the story of an American of Mexican origin, but
born and raised in East Los Angeles, who accidentally gets caught up in an
immigration raid on a factory.  So while his cousin, the true illegal alien
(played by stand-up comedian Paul Rodriguez), escapes and begins to enjoy
the pleasures of life in the United States (occasionally with hilarious
results), Cheech finds himself south of the border with no way to get home
or prove his citizenship.  But Yanqui ingenuity prevails and Cheech manages
to find ways to hustle enough money to pay someone to smuggle him back
across the border.  His life is complicated by a Nicaraguan (?) refugee he
meets and falls in love with who is also trying to get to the United States.
     As I said, this film also carries a message, a very positive message
about life in the United States and what is valuable about it.  (It also has
the best video to Neil Diamond's "America" that I have seen.)  It points out
the problems caused by an immigration policy that makes everyone of Hispanic
origin an alien until proved otherwise.  If you avoided this film in the
theaters because you don't like Cheech Marin movies, give it a try now on
video or cable.
