Title
Review for Reality Bites (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
Cast: Winona Ryder (Lelaina); Janeane Garofalo (Vickie); Ethan Hawke
      (Troy); Ben Stiller (Mike).
     This movie can really be broken down into two parts.  The first
half was an humorous, intelligent story of one woman's job and man
troubles shortly after graduation.  The second half was a depressingly
realistic look at what makes these people tick.  I found myself
wondering whether my generation is really as f-ed up as we appear in
this movie.
     The first half tells the story, not only of Lelaina, but of the
people she lives with and the people she hangs out with.  There is her
roommate, and soon to be GAP manager, Vickie, who has slept with
sixty-six men, whose names she can't all remember.  But she does have
an knack for killer one-liners.  There is their gay "permanent
resident" who is an underwritten character.  He doesn't do much except
set up Vickie's jokes.  And then there is the obnoxious temporary
roommate, Troy, who does nothing but hang around the house and insult
everyone around him.  But he saves his meanest for Lelaina, and by that
we are supposed to conclude that he loves her.
     Before the "cliche" police come out in full force, it should be
said that this breaks the standard lines in more way than one.  First
of all, these two aren't enemies.  They have even slept together once,
although Lelaina claims she was drunk at the time.  Second, they
establish very early that they are attracted to each other.  The
question is not whether they are willing to admit it, as is normal, but
more of whether she can do better than him.
     Now, without going into detail, the second half of the movie was
almost too realistic.  It shows a group of people who have no sense of
direction, living one dimensional lives, if that.  They are not
searching for salvation, they are merely trying to survive.  There is
no feeling that the conclusion is final, or that the characters will be
happy for ever after.
     This movie does invite criticism, some warranted and some not.
First, the warranted.  It does seem unrealistic that a class
valedictorian would have difficulty with addition (as Lelaina
does--costing her a job opportunity) or would be unable to define
irony.  The movie would have been better had they let Lelaina be a
good, but not great student.  And the unwarranted intrusion of rich
parents really sapped some of her futility.  She should have been drawn
more generically.
     The unfair criticism, as I see it, is this.  There is the usual
backlash against happy endings, and complaints that Lelaina chooses the
wrong man.  It seems to me that the two complaints are contradictory.
As for the second, it is a double standard, that we want reality, but
we also want her to be happy.  Sometimes people do pick the wrong
partner.  Her decision is predictable because it is in keeping with her
character.  The other criticism, that the movie failed to be fresh
after a while, while true, is not as much a criticism as a comment of
the flow of the movie.  There were two jobless characters, one who
thought she was dying of AIDS and one who was kicked out of his house.
Fresh might have been the wrong mood for the movie to take.

Author
David Wong Shee
As with all stories REALITY BITES can be viewed from a range of 
overlapping vantage points.
*   The dyadic and romantic.  "Friendships" and/or "relationships" 
    between those of opposite gender or the same gender.  The most 
    prominent in this film was the "romantic tension" between Lelaina 
    (Winona Ryder) and Troy (Ethan Hawke) who alternately flirt and 
    fight on the border between friendship and love, and between the 
    casual and the intimate, throughout the course of the film.
*   An ensemble piece.  The culture and psychology of a small closely 
    knit group.  The success to which the culture of the group is 
    communicated as reflected by degree to which the "in jokes" are 
    comprehensible to outsiders (the audience).
*   As "Hollywood".  The perennial debate over whether the latest 
    Beautiful Young Thing can act or whether he or she is just another
    cinematic hood ornament.
*   The cinematographic and nostalgic.  The Past as video, home movies
    or black and white television.  Similar examples which come to 
    mind include: Paul Cox's films MY FIRST WIFE, MAN OF FLOWERS, MY 
    LIFE; the opening scene of TRIP TO BOUNTIFUL; THE SUM OF US; and MY 
    LIFE.  REALITY BITES could be seen as a nostalgic reflection on the 
    seventies is as distinct from that for the fifties and sixties.  
*   The developmental and socio-cultural.
It is to the last of these that the rest of this article addresses itself. 
     This movie examines the transition from adolescence into young
adulthood made a background of accelerating social and cultural
change.  This transition period can be somewhat protracted for, among
others, those engaging in tertiary education.
    In any event, there can be a rather abrupt change in the was
reality is perceived from the view through the rose coloured glasses of
childhood to a much sharper and sometimes brutal "real world" outside
the protective boundaries of the family.  There being a marked contrast
between the experiences the post-war boom of the "baby boomer"
generation of rapid economic growth and full employment with that of
their post-post-war offspring.  The "generation gap" seems to widening
with each succeeding generation this century.
    There are reflections on the fallout of the changes in the Family,
for example, the experience of children who's parents divorced during
their childhood or adolescence.  This runs in parallel with the
disintegration of a uniform value system at the societal level.  That
is not to say that pluralism is a bad thing, however it does for many
hone certain existential issues to an uncomfortable sharpness.
    There is what might be described as the "evolution" of the hippie
into the yuppie.  A change which mirrors a conservative shift among
youth secondary perhaps to anxieties about finding work to "survive" -
if not fulfilling middle-class expectations of a certain standard of
living in industrialised urban societies.
    Examined also are the place (if any) in America of the Intellectual
and of other recognizable stereotypes such as the Yuppie, the Hippie,
the Dropout, and the Homosexual.  Overlaid on these types are the
individual characteristics of the particular person portrayed.  Are
relationships across such subcultural types viable, for example,
between Lelaina and Michael (a yuppie with a Heart of Gold?).
Hippie = A young person who rejects conventional ideas and society and
         adopts and unusual style of dress and habits, etc (OED).
Yuppie = Young Upwardly Mobile Professional
--
 * David Wong Shee * david@zikzak.apana.org.au * Live Long and Prosper *

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     REALITY BITES doesn't quite add up.  On the surface, this
agreeable romantic comedy seems like a landmark achievement from both
director Ben Stiller and writer Helen Childress.  It's funny, it's
handsome, and it boasts a *very* appealing cast.
     Touche, Richard Linklater, REALITY BITES is also Hollywood's first
saga about today's disillusioned, post-college youth.  A group better
known as "Generation X."  Comic book forthcoming.
     The film centers on Leaina Pierce (Ryder), a recent Houston, Texas
grad.  Formerly the class valedictorian--who closed her speech with the
sentence "There's no answer."--she now works as an intern on a morning
television show.  She also moonlights as an amateur filmmaker.
     Her roommates are a motley crew.  There's Troy (Hawke), a musician
who excels at lost jobs and umkempt hair.  And Sammy (Zahn), also
unemployed but known to bathe.  And Vickie (Garofalo), proud manager of
a Gap clothing store.
     All living and breathing and eating together.  All in the throes
of dating woes.  And all being filmed for Leaina's documentary.
     With its film-within-a-film subplot, REALITY BITES sounds the
perfect "verite" vehicle for an exploration of "X."  Wrong!  REALITY
BITES is a completely conventional film right down to the squishy,
happy Hollywood ending.  Which is not needed in a story rich with both
humor *and* insight.
     These are kids raised on sitcoms and advertising; kids who talk in
jingles and don't understand why their worlds cannot be restored at the
end of the half-hour.  To which Troy can only comment "Mr. Brady died
of AIDS."
     Who needs formula with psychology like this?
     Ryder, Hawke, and the rest of the gang are tremendous appealing.
Even if they need baths and better clothes.  Ryder, in particular, is a
dynamite presence.  Watch for John Mahoney, who steals a couple scenes
as a chatty TV host, and an unbilled Jeanne Tripplehorn.
     With Stiller's smart direction and good gag after gag, REALITY
BITES feels fine up to a point.  After about an hour of endless
references to the seventies, something doesn't just add up.  These kids
were infants at that time!  How do they know so much about disco and
"Good Times" and PLANET OF THE APES?  Do reruns *really* contain that
much detail?
     Honestly, REALITY BITES feels like it was written by someone in
their their '30's.  The cultural references just don't add up and it
makes an for an incongruity that almost pushes the film into fantasy.
Is writer Helen Childress (in her '20's) *really* taking the pulse of
America's young-adults.  Or did she just find the perfect world to
populate with phony characters?
Suggested alternate title: FANTASY BITES.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In print and television interviews, everyone associated with
REALITY BITES has been trying desperately to convince potential viewers
that it's not a "Generation X" movie, but just a simple romantic
comedy.
     REALITY BITES follows SLACKER; SINGLES; and BODIES, REST & MOTION
in the sweepstakes to most accurately capture the 20-something
zeitgeist, but I found it more reminiscent of star Winona Ryder's
breakthrough film HEATHERS.  While REALITY BITES does include some very
funny moments and finely observed insight, it also tends to reduce its
central characters to a collection of kitschy bon mots.
     Ryder stars in REALITY BITES as Lelaina Pierce, a recent college
grad living in Houston.  Lelaina, an aspiring filmmaker, works as an
intern at a local morning talk show while filming a documentary about
herself and her closest friends:  acerbic roommate Vickie (Janeane
Garofolo), a clerk at the Gap; cynical grunge musician Troy (Ethan
Hawke); and in-the-closet gay Sammy (Steve Zahn).  Tensions begin when
Troy loses his job and moves in with Lelaina and Vickie, then heighten
when Lelaina begins dating Michael (Ben Stiller), an executive for
MTV-clone In Your Face TV.  Their relationship forces Troy to deal with
his feelings for Lelaina, and about responsibility in general.
Meanwhile, Vicke faces an HIV test, and Sammy considers coming out to
his parents.
     REALITY BITES is strongest on the level of details and the number
of individual laughs of recognition they provide.  I will admit to
participating in a group sing-along of "Conjunction Junction" like
these characters, and to playing games based on sit-com episodes.
Screenwriter Helen Childress, all of 23 years old, realizes that the
common thread binding her chronological peers is 1970s schlock culture,
and the disillusionment born of watching their parents conspicuously
credit consume them out of a bright future.  Vickie is perhaps the most
recognizable type to me; I know a few people who cover their walls with
old music posters and beg for you to turn up bad power pop songs with
memories of junior high school dances.  More so than SINGLES, REALITY
BITES identifies the sense of ideological drift that characterizes
Americans in their mid-20s, but without the moody self-importance of
BODIES, REST & MOTION.
     This is not to say that Childress doesn't also give in to easy
stereotypes.  Every parent in REALITY BITES is characterized by a
cartoonish materialism, and becomes an easy target for blame.  Lelaina
never develops a distinct personality, instead becoming a
representation of the job traumas of the generation.  The romantic
triangle doesn't have quite the impact it could have had because as
attractive as Ryder is, she doesn't seem nearly as interesting as, say,
Vickie.  Troy is an even more problematic character, a first class
self-absorbed jerk who philosophizes in bastardized advertising
jingles.  The transformation Childress tries to foist off on us is far
too contrived, and she seems too willing to let Troy's attitude stand
as an acceptable response to the world he perceives.  Fortunately, they
are somewhat balanced by two delightful supporting performances.  Comic
Janeane Garofolo (TV's THE LARRY SANDERS SHOW) is hysterical as Vickie,
displaying a natural timing which makes the most mundane lines funny.
Director Ben Stiller is charming as Lelaina's perpetually flustered
suitor, and should be congratulated for risking the hesitating delivery
which makes his character appear very real.
     I have to note that I was extremely disappointed by the ending of
REALITY BITES, but that may say more about me than about the film.
While there are numerous character stumbles, overall I felt the tone
was on target, and I laughed a lot.  REALITY BITES off a bit more than
it can chew, but it all goes down eventually.

Author
Dorothy Pomerantz
Staring: Winona Ryder, Ethan Hawke, Ben Stiller
Directed by: Ben Stiller
     When I first heard about REALITY BITES, I was scared.  I hate
anything that tries to generalize my generation.  A few years ago I was
one of the many people interviewed for a book called THE 13th
GENERATION.  I gave my version of where we stand as did everyone else,
and the book ended up being something about people who didn't exist.
It was an abstraction of what a few cranky young adults said.  I feared
that REALITY BITES would show the same tendency towards
over-generalization that would give us all the opportunity to say, "Well,
things suck but at least it's not our fault and there is nothing we can
do about it."  I was wrong.
     REALITY BITES did scare me when I finally saw it because it was so
dead-on.  It might as well have been my friends and me on the screen.
It was so close that I didn't even feel like I was watching a movie, I
felt like I was hanging out with some friends.
     REALITY BITES is the story of Lelaina, a bright, ambitious,
wanna-be documentary film maker.  Upon graduating from college, Lelaina
has moved into an apartment with her best friend Vicki and is working
as a PA at a morning show.  At the same time she is filming a
documentary about her friends including her best buddy Troy (Ethan
Hawke).  Troy is a SNAG (Sensative New Age Guy) and a Slacker (see
Richard Linkletter's film) who can't quite seem to get off his duff.  He
keeps getting fired from jobs until he finally moves in with Lelaina
and Vicki to put some sexual tension into the film.
     Once Troy moves in Lelaina finds herself involved with a killer
yuppie named Michael played uncomfortably by Ben Stiller.  This causes
even more animosity and tension between Lelaina and Troy, and after
Lelaina looses her job, everything begins to spiral downward.  We learn
that Troy is pining away for his dying father, Vicki is worried about
dying of AIDS, and their other friend Steve is getting ready to come
out to his parents.
     The plot is only part of the show.  The main thrust of this movie
is how well Ben Stiller has capture the language and the attitudes of
the 20-somethings.  There is always music in the background and
everyone is always singing.  They constantly make references to TV
shows.  One of the best lines is when Lelaina comforts her friend Vicki
by telling her that "Melrose Place" is a really good show.  Troy knows
the meaning of the word irony but he can't hold a job, their drinking
games consist of naming "Good Times" episodes and they can all sing the
words to several School House Rocks.
     The question is, how does all this translate to the average
viewer?  Probably not very well.  I loved this film because it seemed
to have so much to do with me.  I am just out of college struggling to
find my way in this "real world" and trying to figure out what life is
about and how to navigate through it.  I also knew all the tunes and
almost all the TV references (a fact I'm not exactly proud of).  To
the average viewer however, this will probably play like a weak love
story.  You know who Lelaina is going to end up with even though he's a
complete dick.  The camera work is average.  There is some use of video
but nothing we haven't seen before and not done in any sort of
interesting way. Sometimes Lelaina's camera seems to pick up things
that were just put in to make the movie more interesting.  There is one
very ironic part where Ben Stiller has sold Lelaina's tapes to an
MTV-type company that he works for (in Houston?!?) and they have
turned it into a trashy video called "Reality Bites".  Does this reflect
on the movie that Ben Stiller has actually made?  You be the judge.
     This movie is really about average; however, for me it was a
bizarre surreal experience.  It made me see that my problems are so
typical that there they are up on the screen.  Suddenly, things don't
seem quite so bad.  This movie is funny and entertaining, but if you
already have kids, you might want to save your 6.50.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Take a typical romantic comedy, add a dash of Cameron Crow's
SINGLES, and top it off with a little WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, and you get
REALITY BITES, Ben Stiller's feature film debut, and the movie that
draws out the most memorable performance from Winona Ryder since
HEATHERS (THE AGE OF INNOCENCE not excepted).
     Following college graduation, four close friends--Lelaina Pierce
(Winona Ryder), Troy Dyer (Ethan Hawke), Vicki Miner (Janeane
Garofalo), and Sammy Gray (Steve Zahn)--are still hanging out with
each other.  In fact, after Troy loses his job and moves in with
Lelaina and Vicki, three of them are living together.  It's life
without a direction, however.  Vicki is working at the Gap, Troy is
unemployed after being fired from his twelfth job, and Lelaina is on
the slow track working for a local morning television show.  Their
personal lives are no less settled, with the promiscuous Vicki obsessed
with getting AIDS, and Lelaina trying to choose romantically between
best friend Troy and an MTV-type station manager yuppie named Michael
Grates (Ben Stiller).
     REALITY BITES starts with a lot of promise, but it doesn't take
long for its freshness to wear thin.  Struggling for the feel of
SINGLES, the film matches neither the quirkiness nor the honest insight
of the 1992 feature.  It doesn't take long for the central romantic
conflict to become established, and from then to the conclusion,
REALITY BITES follows a number of standard formulas.
     The characters are all types, with little or no depth beyond the
expected.  This is true not only of the central figures, but the
supporting ones as well.  It becomes tiresome after a while to
continually make accurate predictions of what each character is going
to do.
     Commercialism runs rampant, as well.  Some of the product
placements are grossly obvious (so obvious that I'm willing to give
director Ben Stiller the benefit of the doubt and wonder if he isn't
satirizing their use in other movies), and the soundtrack has all the
marks of something designed to sell CDs and tapes.  At least when Troy
is required to sing, it's actually Ethan Hawke dubbing the vocals.
     There are some clever moments, the best of which are the satires
of MTV- type "cutting edge" programming.  Also enjoyable is John
Mahoney as a Phil Donahue-like morning talk show host who's affable in
front of the camera, but nasty offstage.
     Winona Ryder turns in a strong performance as Lelaina, but she is
often upstaged by Janeane Garofalo, who has all the best one-liners.
Both work well together, and their impromptu dance to "My Sharona"
(shown in all the commercials) is one of REALITY BITES' silliest
highlights.
     Would that the chemistry between Ms. Ryder and her male co-stars
was as strong.  There are no sparks between her and Ethan Hawke or Ben
Stiller.  This makes it difficult to care about the central romance.
Also, from the beginning, there's never really any doubt about who
Lelaina is going to end up with.
     Frankly, I expected more from REALITY BITES.  It's certainly a
watchable film, but it lacks any semblance of originality.  Beneath a
thin veneer of style, all the old cliches and formulas of typical
romantic comedies lie buried.  A number of people, especially fans of
Ms. Ryder, will be delighted by this film, but I can't add my voice to
their acclaim.  REALITY BITES is far too ordinary.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
