Title
Review for Bad Girls Go To Hell (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
....or, if they can't get that far, New York.  Shoestring-budget film 
making by NY auteur Doris Wishman, the only woman to really leave her 
mark in the exploitation industry, is recommended to those who are 
hell-bent on sampling everything from the sleaze/trash end of the cinema 
spectrum.  Everyone else would be advised to spend time elsewhere.  
Minimal plot concerns good housewife (Gigi Darlene) who inadvertently 
kills her sex-crazed janitor by knocking a plate over his head (breaking 
the plate would have probably sent the film over budget) and then goes 
on the lam to New York where she encounters several locals interested 
only in abusing her.  Film has several Wishman trademarks: a photo 
montage of opening titles, hand-held camerawork, bad dubbing (even the 
characters in SPEED RACER emote more believably than this), women 
dressing/undressing with their backs to the camera, women dancing in 
their underwear, and, of course, several closeups of feet.
Story bears analysis only as part of a phenomenon and not as any 
intrinsic artwork.  In the Wishman universe, women are helpless and men 
are bestial, but at least the consistency of her product develops its 
own reality.  Watch three of her films in a row and you'll find that the 
snazzy music, absence of sets/props, and confined apartment interiors 
become almost normal.  This works in favor of BAD GIRLS GO TO HELL, 
because the mindlessness of the story, which episodically relates the 
protagonist's bad experiences one after another, is in keeping with the 
idea of a World of Punishment: the innocent accidentally transgresses 
and must suffer by being inexplicably mistreated by everyone she meets.  
It finally gets to the stage when the sight of her appearing with her 
suitcases in hand is laughable.  There's more: you'll be bewildered when 
Detective 'Tom' enters a room via the wardrobe - did Wishman really 
expect us to believe it was a front door?  And you won't forget 
Darlene's 'acrobatic dance'.  At least these absurd touches prevent us 
from being offended by the film's sex and violence.  None of it is 
believable: characters don't behave or react the way we would expect in 
real life, but they do behave exactly the way we would expect them to in 
an exploitation movie.  *Everything*  Wishman does is in service to the 
genre.  Her dialogue (she uses pseudonyms on the credits) is not bad 
enough to be entertaining, but easy, predictable and banal.  You'll have 
heard every line of dialogue in a hundred other movies.  Still, while 
cheapies like this are easy to knock, they do occupy a valid place in 
cinema history.  For example, this is one of the few films of the time 
where audiences could see a married couple showering together!  And you 
have to give Wishman her due for entering a male-only genre and making a 
success of it.  I don't know if that's any excuse for her making such 
brain-numbing efforts as NUDE ON THE MOON, however.

