Title
Review for Red Scorpion (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Burke Cox
RED SCORPION (R - violence, language)
     Dolph (ROCKY IV, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE) Lundgren stars as Nicolai, the
most respected and dangerous member of a super-elite Soviet military special
forces group.  Nicolai is ordered to end a growing rebellion in Soviet and
Cuban controlled Africa.  His mission is to befriend a captured member of the
African rebellion and use that friendship to gain entry into the rebels' main
camp.  As soon as Nicolai is trusted and in the camp, he is to assassinate their
leader.  
     The movie centers around Nicolai's struggle with his orders.  At first, he
is an unwavering soldier acting not on what he feels but on what he is told.
But he soon develops a growing resistance to the sanctity of his orders, and
finally a disgust for the Soviet and Cuban oppression in Africa.  
     Lundgren gives a respectable performance as Nicolai, making much of the
movie seem believable.  It is this performance that makes the movie worthwhile.
Removing Nicolai's personal struggle would reduce the quality and interest of
this film significantly.  But, Lundgren does portray a very human and
interesting character.  Of particular interest is his interaction with and old
African bushmen.  Without the benefits of a common language, these two develop
a unique bond between each another that provides the most memorable sequence in
the film.  
     But don't get too excited, this movie could have been better.   It was
unbelievable in a few parts, and technically poor in others.   However,
considering the budget and targeted audience, this movie reaches its goals.  It
is an entertaining and interesting film that, although somewhat predictable,
manages to interject little pieces of human nature into the somewhat tired and
worn subject of weak rebels led by a strong outsider against a common foe.  If
you like this type of movie, you will probably enjoy this film.  

Author
Greg Goebel
[Moderator's Note: I am in the process of changing machines for news.
My old address will still work, as well as my new one. -ecl]
     Every time I go strolling through the paperback section of the Corvallis
Fred Meyer department store -- I do this mostly out of habit, since I lost
interest in novels a long time ago -- I notice one section is devoted to what,
for want of a better term, I would call "male Harlequins".  Women (apparently)
like to read slushy romances; men, on the other hand, like to read violent
action novels.
     These violent action books have titles like MIA HUNTER or SAIGON COMMANDOS
or whatever.  There's a whole rack of 'em, and they're usually numbered as
elements of a series.  Mind you, I'm not criticizing these books.  People write
them and make a living.  People buy them and kill some time with them.
Everyone's happy.  (Some may claim that such books have a pernicious effect on
the character of those who read them, but as a concern I personally have to
place that somewhere below the potential toxicity of my tooth fillings.)
     There are movies that seem to fall in this category as well, and there I
would solidly place RED SCORPION.
     In this film, Scandinavian hunk Dolf Lundgren plays a Soviet SPETSNATZ
commando, sent to some mythical African nation (Mombassa or Mikubu or ... what
the hell, something like that) to help suppress a rebellion.  He eventually
realizes that he's fighting on the wrong side and helps the rebels.
     "And?" you ask.  "And what?!" I reply.  That's really all there is to
it.  It's sort of like a WWII-vintage propaganda flic, with the sadistic and
brutal Russians and Cubans oppressing the noble African freedom fighters.  It's
all pretty much by-the-numbers:  violence, combat, torture, fistfights; lots
and lots of fiery explosions.
     I didn't mind, myself.  I had a frustrating week, and I wanted to go park
my brains for a while before I blew a fuse and bit the mailman.  I knew what I
was getting into and got exactly what I expected.
     RED SCORPION has zero pretensions of being anything but what it is, and
makes no false claims in its advertising.  Anybody who goes to see this movie
with high expectations will be disappointed, but I would have to say that would
be like picking up a paperback like DELTA FORCE RAIDERS and expecting to read
WAR AND PEACE.
     Still, it would be nice to see some movies that I don't forget the instant
I walk out the door.  But BARON MUNCHAUSEN hasn't made it to the provinces yet,
so I guess I'll just have to satisfy myself by writing reviews.
