Title
Review for Glocken aus der Tiefe (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Daniel Robinson
     The SFIFF always offers an opportunity to see foreign movies that
will not get a distribution deal and this year was no exception.  Last
year, a movie in Arabic, THE DOVE'S LOST NECKLACE, was my pick of the
best of the unseen.  Here are the eight movies in the order that I saw
them.
     This year's pick was WHERE IS THE FRIEND'S HOME, by Abbas
Kiarostami.  It is about a young boy trying to return a school book to
a friend who lives in a neighboring village and the adventures he
encounters.  Shot in northern Iran with non-professional talent, the
film was a wonderful look at life in Iran.  There were the usual
problems of subtitles that don't convey the full story (judging from
the laughs elicited from the Iranians in the audience), but I liked
it.  The program guide set me up for a heavy existential piece about
searching, and the film is not like that (I think...).
     TITO AND ME, from Goran Markovic, was my favorite movie, and will
probably get art house distribution in America.  Set in Yugoslavia in
1954, this movie used great production values and acting to tell the
story of a boy with an imaginary playmate, Josef Tito.  The music was
great (Joe Bob Briggs would describe it as xylophone-fu) and the acting
was first-rate.  There were many minor characters with five to ten
lines that were still fully described.  The program set this movie up
as a dry political piece, but it was funny and heart-warming.  If I get
a chance, I will see this movie again.  This is a great film, and
deserves Oscar notice.
     Christine Pascal's THE LITTLE PRINCE SAID was a major
disappointment.  The director, a former actress (Bernard Tavernier's
THE CLOCKMAKER) didn't seem to understand story concepts and wanted to
take a position.  I prefer movies that make observations and don't take
positions: if the observations are well founded, then there will be
only one position to take.  The basic story is about a divorced Swiss
doctor-researcher whose daughter becomes deathly ill.  He pulls her out
of the hospital to try to tell her something about himself in the
little time she has left.  This was a muddled mess and I do not
recommend it.
     Werner Herzog's double bill was one of the highlights of the
show.  BELLS FROM THE DEEP is his look at Kuwait after the liberation.
He shows people who suffered, and fires as they were being
extinguished.  The look of the piece was documentarian, but it was not
cut that way and didn't try to be a documentary.  It was as if an
Impressionist painter painted real life scenes from any of the large
scale tragedies that have occurred in this century.  Herzog's choice of
music was always deft.  LESSONS OF DARKNESS is about religion and
spirituality in Russia.  Herzog went to Russia and got some glimpses of
things that are not on the evening news.  This movie also looks like a
documentary, but is a wonderful collection of images and interviews
that paint a great picture.  I was amused by the realization that
Christianity has been changed by the cultures that it encounters,
rather than the other way around.  FAITHHEALER is a subdialect of any
language {:>) Werner Herzog was on hand for a question and answer
session and I was impressed by his manner and attitude.  I had never
seen a Herzog movie before, but I intend to see more of them.
     DARK SIDE OF THE HEART is a wonderful movie from Eliseo Subiela.
This is my runner-up as best of festival.  It is about a poet who
consults in advertising in Buenos Aires.  His real goal in life is to
find a woman who "flies."  The movie is about poetry, and I'm willing
to bet that this movie will be remade in Hollywood with Alex Baldwin or
someone like him in the lead role.  It is blackly funny, but a little
long.  I will probably see this film again.
     Yve Montand's last movie does not serve him well.  The movie looks
incomplete, like the director, Jean-Jacques Beineix (DIVA), didn't so
much finish it as just stopped filming and started cutting.  Character
motivation, reasoned action and insight into the human condition are
replaced by style, wistful looks and energetic lunges at ideas.  I do
not recommend it.
     THE BLUE EYES OF YONTA from Flora Gomes is about life in
Guinea-Bissau.  It is an honorable attempt, but by contemporary
standards, it misses badly.  The plot centers around a young man who
wants to meet a woman, Yonta.  She is played well but the rest of the
cast is rather wooden.  This is only the third feature film to be
released from Guinea-Bissau since it won its independence from Portugal
in 1974.  There were probably things that I didn't understand (when you
are reading subtitles, it is hard to read between the lines) but I
would not recommend this film.
     There was an interesting story to be told in ABOUT LOVE, TOKYO by
Mitsuo Yanagimachi.  But he didn't tell it.  He had lots of good
imagery that could have set up a tragedy, but he didn't follow through
on it.  Neither did he redeem the protagonist.  The story is about a
Chinese student studying in Japan.  Ho-Jun kills cattle in a
slaughterhouse and studies at night.  He has been seduced by the fast
life of Tokyo and cheats at the pinball gambling houses.  He has an
affair with a Chinese woman who has lived in Japan all of her life.
She was a more compelling character, but the story uses her to talk
about Ho-Jun.  A major theme in the movie is the discrimination by the
Japanese against all foreigners.  It is handled well, as observation
and not a position, but it is not enough to carry the movie.  This
movie has many interesting scenes, but I won't see it again.

Author
Max Hoffmann
Seen: Fri 5/7/93, Camera 3 San Jose, SF Film Festival
Rating: 10 (scale of 1->10)
     There were no program notes on this late entry at the festival,
and it was too dark in the theatre to capture the rushing credits.  In
a nutshell, Herzog sets his camera running with beautiful backdrops
throughout Russia.  He places various peasants and country folk who
speak directly to the lens about their religion/faith/superstitions.
It's fascinating viewing.  This would be the equivalent to letting the
camera roll in the backwoods of America to let snake handlers and holy
rollers tell their view of reality.
     Near Mongolia, we see the "Yulas," tribes who make strange, deep
frog-like croakings to reach a meditative state.  View old people on
their hands and knees crawling around Lake Kitesh, where they believe
there is an enchanted city with angels at the bottom.  More chilling is
the image of the faithful crawling out "on thin ice" as far as they can
to "view" the city below them.  As they do, you hear the eerie tearing
noises of cracking ice.
     A believable "Rasputin" (redeemer) makes frequent appearances and
comments, with a DaVinci like river background.  You hear him speaking
in endless New Testiment-like platitudes reminiscent of Elizabeth
Claire Prophet.  (In light of the recent Waco faithful-fry, it's
sometimes chilling.)  In the director's Q/A afterward, Herzog revealed
at the time of the filming last year there were about a hundred
"Rasputins" claiming to be Jesus returned.  Now the number is closer to
three hundred.  This s a normal phenomenon that occurs whenever Russia
is in a state of crisis and the faithful have trouble coping with a
changing world.
     Although you try not to snicker, some of the images approach Monty
Python humor; like the "grand sorcerer of Russia" who tries a mass
exorcism of a dozen highly spiritied "possessed" women on a high school
gymnasium stage.  Herzog takes a similar tack to LESSONS OF DARKNESS
where there is no narration to add judgement or a spin to what you are
viewing.  To an American audience, conditioned by CNN sound bites and
news images that resemble action sequences from a Bruce Willis trailer,
it's remarkably refreshing to have an extended view of a phenomenon and
be forced to draw your own reaction, without help.
     Very striking photography, and a lean but touching score.
