Title
Review for Wind (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
George V. Reilly
     WIND is a film directed by Carroll Ballard from a script by Rudy
Wurlitzer and Mac Gudgeon taken from a story by Jeff Benjamin and Roger
Vaughan & Kimball Livingston.  It stars Matthew Modine, Jennifer Grey,
Stellan Skarsgard, Rebecca Miller, with Cliff Robertson and Jack
Thompson.
     WIND is a lot of spectacular footage of sailing interspersed with a
lacklustre comeback story.  The story is loosely inspired by Dennis
Connor losing and subsequently regaining the America's Cup in the 80s.
(Every four years, a collection of international teams battle it out for
the Cup in 12-metre sailboats.  Apart from the Australian victory a few
years ago, the Cup has been held since the start over a century ago by
America.)
     Modine is a hotshot sailor who gets picked for the America's Cup
team by wealthy skipper Robertson.  As the tactician, he makes a
miscalculation in the final race, losing the cup to the Australian boat
(which is skippered by Thompson).   Months later, he rejoins his
aeronautical engineer girlfriend Grey (who had been forced off the Cup
team by sexism) in the desert where she is building gliders with oddball
European designer Skarsgard.  Eventually, they decide to build a boat to
win back the America's Cup from the Australians, and Robertson's flaky
daughter Miller forms a syndicate to fund the effort.  The Geronimo,
skippered by Modine, wins through to the finals against their old
rivals, the Australians, and the film ends with the final race between
them.
     The boats are the real stars of WIND.  Sleek and elegant, they cut
through the waves, tacking and overtaking each other heroically.  The
photography of the sailing scenes is marvelous and the races are
compelling.  This should be seen in a cinema; a television screen simply
can't do the photography justice.
     The sailing is noteworthy (I don't know anything about sailing but
I was impressed) but the plot leaves much to be desired.   Most of the
overlong middle portion of the film could have been chopped with no
loss: presumably it was cheaper and easier to film in the desert.
Modine and Grey and the others turn in reasonable performances, but the
script doesn't allow them to become interesting, engaging characters.
(The writers apparently think that making the supporting characters be
eccentric will make them interesting.)
