Title
Review for "Outer Limits, The" (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "FINAL APPEAL: THE OUTER LIMITS" (Showtime TV)
  On Sunday, Sept. 3, at 8 PM, the two-hour final episode of
"The Outer Limits" concludes the popular sci-fi series which aired 132
original, made-for-television episodes during six seasons. Written by
Sam Egan and directed by Jimmy Kaufman, "Final Appeal" is set in the
year 2076, when the U.S.  Supreme Court agrees to hear a landmark
case. Amanda Plummer plays Dr. Theresa Givens, who has been sentenced
to death for her "crimes against society." Her transgressions center
around the use of a time-travel device which violates a stringent ban
on all technology in the wake of a devastating, world-wide
technological holocaust. So it's back to the horse 'n' buggy as
transportation and communication are restricted to the lowest levels
of development. Kelly McGillis is her defense attorney, while Michael
Moriarty is the prosecutor. Charlton Heston is the Chief Justice who
is joined on the bench by Robert Loggia, Cicily Tyson, Swoozie Kurtz,
and Hal Holbrook. The trial's outcome is unexpectedly prompted by a
surprise witness, a terrorist played by Wallace Langham. The concept
of using technology as a scapegoat for all of society's ills is
intriguing, particularly with the use of film clips from previous
"Outer Limits" episodes to illustrate different points-of-view. But,
as actors, Amanda Plummer and Michael Moriarty muddle their
characters. It's one thing for a thespian to choose an unusual
line-reading, it's another to waver uncomfortably on the edge of
bizarre. Plus, the staid courtroom setting tends to grow static as the
participants are confined to specific places. So, on the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Final Episode" culminates in a 5, begging the
question: What will become of a world that has outlawed the tools it
has traditionally used to solve its problems?
