Title
Review for To Die for (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Starring Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, Joaquin Phoenix, Casey Affleck, Illeana
Douglas, Alison Folland, Dan Hedaya, Wayne Knight, and Kurtwood Smith
     Recently, the media has come to the quiet little town that I live in.
One of the things I liked about moving here was that, for all intensive
purposes, it was a land of the free.  Free of loan-sharks, litigation
lawyers.  Free of pickpockets, car jackers, and murders.  But most of all,
it was free of media.  Every time that I have experienced the media, they
have done something akin to biting the hand that feeds them.
     I am not altogether free to fight back and call the media a bunch of
jackals due to the fact that I am a member of it myself.  I am, however,
free to do a retrospective of a movie that does what I cannot: bites back.
     This movie is To Die For.  Forget all that you hear about Oliver
Stone's cult-classic Natural Born Killers being the media satire to end all
media satires.  Compared to To Die For, Natural Born Killers is child's
play.
     Natural Born Killers was clumsy.  Sure, it hit the media.  But, while
setting the media in its sights it took a number of innocent bystanders with
it.  It took on violent movies; violent television, I Love Lucy, romance,
and all of that crap that we really don't want to see all mixed together.
Natural Born Killers is a cleaver.  To Die For is a scalpel.
     From frame one, To Die For takes out one thing and one thing only: the
media.  The first thing we bear witness to is a hoard of reporters rushing
through a graveyard to the funeral of Larry Maretto (Matt Dillon), a man who
his "weather girl" wife Suzanne Stone (Nicole Kidman) is suspected of
murdering.  As the reporters all rush to be the first, we see one of them
fall.  He is trampled as the others rush right over him.
     Then we see Suzanne address us directly, taking on the need to do
everything on television.  Our first real introduction to the character, we
see from her first words that she has about as much intelligence as her dog
Walter.  From then on in, we get one simple thing: a pure, vengeful media
satire.
     The plot of the movie is that the girl that does the local weather in
Little Hope, Connecticut has had her husband killed.  Why?  Reason number
one, she wants fame and he doesn't care for it.  Reason number two, she
knows that killing him will get her a little attention.  Attention is
basically all she wants.  As Suzanne is fond of saying, nothings worth doing
if people aren't watching.
     Suzanne, a pampered girl who's never been told no, decides to kill her
husband and enlists the help of three juvenile delinquents to do it.
There's Jimmy Emmett (Joquain Phoenix), who she seduces with her body, Lydia
Mertz (Alison Folland), who she seduces with dreams of Hollywood, and Russel
Hines (Casey Affleck), who she seduces with money and some new CDs.
Controlling them perfectly like pawns on a chessboard, she sets them in
place to do her dirty work, all the while trying to end up famous.
     To Die For doesn't just use a great plot to propel it into the position
of the best media satire to date... it enlists a great sense of dark comedy
to make us laugh at how unbelievably stupid Suzanne is.  It gives us a great
set of memorable characters.  The traditionalist husband (Larry Maretto
(Matt Dillon)).  The father in law with mob connections (Dan Hedaya).  The
incestuous father (Kurtwood Smith).  The ice-skating idiot sister (Illeana
Douglas).
     It also gives us one of the best styles of storytelling.  Gus Van Sant
takes his camera in and takes the media out from the inside, filming the
movie as if it were a PBS documentary.  He edits in interviews with
    Jimmy and Janice Maretto (Douglas).  Shows us a talk show where the two
families share their sides of the stories.  Contrasts this with the dark
story told by a sociopath Suzanne.  He ends us with a bang.
     In one of the best shots ever, he shows us the one girl who hopes to be
famous getting to tell her story and getting her dream.  It has her being
put into split-screen after split-screen... until you get the sensation that
she is everywhere.
     To Die For takes the media out back and beats it to death, keeping a
smile on everyone's face all the time.  For people like me, who are fed up
with the spiel that the networks keep handing down to us, this is a movie
for you to enjoy.
