Title
Review for Return of the Living Dead, The (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Dan O'Bannon, whose scripts always show inventive moments and wry humor, 
finally got the chance to direct with this suitably offbeat horror 
movie.  Part inspired by the zombie films initiated by George A. Romero, 
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD elaborates wildly upon its predecessors.  This 
isn't a sequel - it's a reinventing of how zombies had been seen on the 
screen up to that point.  Story starts in a medical supplies warehouse 
(already, you begin to think "uh-oh") where newcomer Freddy is told by 
his supervisor the "truth" behind Romero's film NIGHT OF THE LIVING 
DEAD.  Sure enough, curiosity leads to meddling, and before you can say 
"Braaaaiinns..", the dead have been reanimated and Freddy and his 
dropout buddies are surrounded by a horde of ghouls.  
Film uses the 'siege' scenario of the Romero stories, but ironically its 
protagonists shelter in different storehouses of death - the warehouse, 
a cemetary, a crematorium, and a mortuary.  The dead are outside, in the 
land of the living; the living have barricaded themselves in the domain 
of the dead.  O'Bannon keeps playing with this intermediary zone until 
we can't remember any difference between a living body that is slowly 
turning undead or a dead body that is struggling back to life.  To blur 
the line further, RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD's zombies don't act like the 
lethargic, green-hued somnambulists of other films that so distinctly 
separate themselves from their human victims.  These zombies talk, move 
adeptly, and get organized. Added to that, several characters in the 
film aren't your normal band of sympathetic protagonists - their 
eccentricity, vulgarity, or nihilism doesn't make us care too much 
whether they join the ranks of the undead or not (with the exception of 
one girl-next-door type whose association with her friends seems very 
unlikely).
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD was a revelation at the time - its style has 
been much imitated since, though it owes a debt to the hip, humorous 
horror of AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON.  It manages the unlikely feat 
of turning a zombie film into an action piece; its demented plot veers 
in almost any direction right up until its conclusion.  Picture has 
everything you could in a zombie flick: splatter, rock music, and scream 
queen Linnea Quigley (who has surely fought more monsters than any other 
actor in living memory).

