Title
Review for Waxwork II: Lost in Time (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     I was just going to review the new film WAXWORK 2: LOST IN TIME,
but I figured while I was at it I might as well write one for WAXWORK as
well, so here goes...
     Deborah Foreman and Michelle Johnson get invited to the premiere
opening of a wax museum run by David Warner.  Warner tells them that the
showing is at midnight and they can bring four friends with them.
Johnson and Foreman invite four friends but two chicken out.  The two
remaining are Zach Galligan and Dana Ashbrook.  Galligan and Foreman
leave after they find out that Ashbrook and Johnson had left the wax
museum, but the next morning Galligan and Foreman find out that Ashbrook
and Johnson never got home.  Galligan suspects that they never left the
waxwork and finds out that Warner is trying to bring hell to Earth.
     WAXWORK is an excellent horror film with a neat new idea (at least
I haven't seen it before).  I highly recommend that you see this film;
it is definitely worth a rental.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
WAXWORK a four.  WAXWORK is not rated but contains explicit language,
violence, and adult situations.   There is also an R rated version of
WAXWORK out, but the only version I have been able to see, or find for
that matter, is the unrated uncensored version.  There is nothing really
bad in the uncensored version so I would recommend that you watch that
one for it will contain more than the R rated version, at least that is
what I would assume.
     The part that I like the most about WAXWORK is how it combines old
horror films with this new one.  I like the idea of when a person walks
into an exhibit they get transported into a world where that exhibit is
going on.  It is also interesting that some of the worlds, like the
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD exhibit, are in black and white, like in the
original version.
     The sets are very well done, and look like the films that they are
pretending to be.  The script is very well written and the acting is
great.  Most of the people in this film end up with cameos because they
are only in one waxwork exhibit.
                          WAXWORK 2: LOST IN TIME
104 min., R, Horror/Science Fiction/Comedy, 1991
Director: Anthony Hickox
Cast: Zach Galligan, Monika Schnarre, Martin Kemp, Bruce Campbell,
      Michael Des Barres, Jim Metzler, Sophie Ward, Marina Sirtis,
      Billy Kane, Joe Baker, Juliet Mills, John Ireland,
      Patrick Macnee, David Carradine, Alexander Godunov,
      Kate Murtagh, Drew Barrymore
The opening paragraph contains spoilers for WAXWORK.
     This sequel to WAXWORK starts off right where WAXWORK left off with
Zach Galligan and Monika Schnarre (played in WAXWORK by Deborah Foreman)
leaving the burning waxwork.  Schnarre is put on trial for the murder of
her father, which was really done by a zombie hand that escaped from the
waxwork.  Galligan finds a time key, that allows you to travel forward
or backwards in time, and they try to travel back in time to try to
prove that such thing as a zombie hand could exist.
     WAXWORK 2 is, I feel, just as good as WAXWORK and a true sequel.
Unlike the first film, the idea for this one is a bit recycled, the last
time I remember this idea being used was in BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT
ADVENTURE, but it is still fun to watch.   Before watching this film, I
suggest you should watch, or re- watch, WAXWORK because it is important
to remember what happened in the first film.  In fact, the ending scenes
of WAXWORK are the opening scenes for this one to remind you what
happened at the end.  On a scale of zero to five, I give WAXWORK 2 a
four.   WAXWORK 2 is rated R for explicit language, adult situations,
and violence.
     WAXWORK was, what I thought, a film that would be impossible to
make a true sequel to.  I consider a true sequel to be a film that
continues a story.  Like SHOCK TREATMENT was not a true sequel to THE
ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW but POLICE ACADEMY 2: THEIR FIRST ASSIGNMENT
was a true sequel to POLICE ACADEMY.   WAXWORK 2 is a true sequel, and I
feel that it is just as good as the original film (something that is
very rare).  I hope that there will be no more WAXWORK films because I
don't think they could make another good one, but I may be wrong.
     It took me a while to rent WAXWORK 2 because my local video store
was out every time I went in.  I am glad that I finally got to see it
for I definitely think it is worth watching.  Unlike WAXWORK this film
is partially a spoof of horror films.  The climatic sword fight through
monster films is priceless, and I feel it is worth watching the film for
that if nothing else.
     The film was very well written and well acted.  Many of the actors
have cameos because they are in one scenario and not in others, but they
all do a good job.  The cinematography was great.  I especially liked
the parts where, when the people went into old films, the picture became
black and white.  The sets were very well done and all together the film
is technically above most horror films today.
