Title
Review for Cold Steel (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the unwritten laws of 1980s action films says that if
something bad could happen, it should happen on Christmas
Eve. COLD STEEL, 1987 film directed by Dorothy Ann Puzo, is
not an exception. It begins when LAPD detective Johnny
Modine (played by Brad Davis) gets his Christmas celebration
spoiled with the news about his father's death. It is the
work of psychopathic junkies who slashed old man to death
while robbing his jewellery store. Johnny is determined to
find the responsible and get his revenge, even if it means
the end of his police career. However, Johnny doesn't know
that the murder was actually part of sinister revenge plot
directed against him. Leader of murderous thugs is his
former friend and colleague Isaac (played by Jonathan Banks)
who blames Johnny for the incident that left him crippled
many years ago. Before he gets to Isaac, Johnny must
overcome many obstacles, including Kathy (played by Sharon
Stone), attractive but mysterious woman with hidden agenda.
Anyone who watches COLD STEEL would realise why this first
film by director Dorothy Ann Puzo also happens to be her
last. In hour and half of its length, Puzo managed to stuff
all possible cliches of 1980s cop movies, including car
chases, explosions and shootouts that, instead of making
this film more attractive, only reveal its limited budget.
Film is even more unattractive because of the dark
photography and terrible 1980s soundtrack. Same goes for
Sharon Stone whose good looks do little to compensate the
awful acting in one of the more embarrassing roles of her
career. Brad Davis, on the other hand, brings perhaps too
much pathos to his lead character, but that, same as very
entertaining performance of Adam Ant as Isaac's British
sidekick, brings COLD STEEL to at least tolerable levels of
mediocrity.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
