Title
Review for Topo, El (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Very strange, very pretentious, but absorbing and compelling
nonetheless. The movie that put Alejandro Jodorowsky on the cult-movie map,
now available once again as a Japanese laserdisc import.
Hordes of cripples come flooding down the mountainside in search of
vengeance. A wise man of the desert is buried under a deluge of white
rabbits. A vicious generalissimo is castrated and commits suicide out of
shame. A mad priest exhorts his followers to play Russian roulette as a sign
of their devotion.
Describing EL TOPO, one of the weirdest and most deliberately pretentious
movies ever made, is a fool's errand. Summarizing the plot doesn't help; in
the end you're inclined to flap your arms and say, "Just see the movie." EL
TOPO was, and is, as much an experience as it was a movie, especially when
it first came out in 1971 and created a storm of cultishness and
controversy. Now once again available legitimately as a Japanese laserdisc,
albeit at the viciously high price of $90-$110, it should be at least seen
once by anyone with a taste for the bizarre.
In the abstract, EL TOPO plays something like a Western as written and
directed by Jim Morrison; in fact, director Alejandro Jodorowsky has cited
Morrison as being a favorite of his. The main character is a nameless
gunslinger, who comes out of the desert to fight evil and prove himself
worthy of the love of a woman he rescues from the hands of cruel and
perverse bandits. He faces several outlandish obstacles and tests, but in
the end, his hands close on thin air, and everything he has worked for
evaporates. He is reborn as a kind of holy fool, and then works to help a
family of cripples and dwarves escape the confines of their cavelike prison
and rejoin the outside world. 
I mentioned EL TOPO was pretentious. This isn't neccesarily a bad thing. EL
TOPO is, if nothing, ambitious as hell in its attempts to be pretentious. In
a way, it's a welcome relief from movies where there's clearly nothing on
the director's mind. So much is on the minds of the people who made EL TOPO,
that it's amazing anything like a story has come out of it. EL TOPO is
loaded with so many striking and powerful images that the story almost
becomes irrelevant. Some of the editing and photography is truly remarkable;
I can see how music-video directors could have taken many cues from this
movie. There is never a moment when there's not something interesting
happening on-screen, even if we don't understand it completely.
EL TOPO is a hard movie to recommend, because it cheerfully defies just
about every convention of moviemaking. It doesn't tell a logical story, but
it does tell an emotionally interesting one. It doesn't subscribe to typical
conventions of plotting or character. It's "different" in the broadest sense
of the term, and anyone who is determined to see something different --
something so far outside the realm of movies as we know them that they have
to start from scratch -- will be curious. But everyone's reactions are
certain to be wildly different. If nothing else, EL TOPO is a great way to
start a long conversation -- or end one.

Author
David Dalgleish
        Starring Alejandro Jodorowsky, Brontis Jodorowsky, Mara Lorenzio,
Paula Romo, Jacqueline Luis;
        Written & Directed by Alejandro Jodorowsky;
        Cinematography by Rafael Corkidi
        To trash EL TOPO requires no effort, for its flaws are plain to
see.  It makes no sense.  It is punctuated by abrupt and inconsistent tonal
shifts.  It is full of exaggerated violence and gratuitous nudity.  It
features hordes of physically "abnormal" people who are paraded across the
screen in service of the film's freakshow aesthetic.  There are absurd
gunfights and duels in which wounds are represented by immense quantities
of patently fake blood.   It offers itself up to harsh criticism with an
abandon that is almost perverse.  I loved it.
        EL TOPO ignores all traditional approaches to narrative and
characterization and thematic development.  One can still judge it by those
standards, of course, but why bother?  They are meaningless within its
parameters.  Instead, the movie indulges all the tasteless or risky or
extreme impulses which other filmmakers tiptoe around, perhaps in fear of
what might be set loose.  It starts as a Western of sorts, ends as an
apocalyptic spiritual drama, and never bothers to explain itself in the
interim.  It is to be experienced, not understood.
        In the opening sequence, a gunslinger in black--El Topo, played by
writer/director Alejandro Jodorowsky--rides out of the desert and
dismounts.  Seated behind him is a naked seven-year-old boy; he too
dismounts, and hunkers down in the sand.  The gunslinger hands the boy a
teddy bear and a picture of his mother.  He tells the boy that he is a man
now, and so must bury his first toy and the picture of his mother.  The boy
does so.  They ride off, and the film is already pregnant with potential
Oedipal conflicts (Freud would have a field day with this movie).
        El Topo and the boy arrive in a village where the people have been
slaughtered.   They learn that some bandits led by The Colonel are
responsible for the bloodbath.  They locate them in a monastery, and slay
them.  El Topo then leaves the boy in the care of the monks and rides off
into the desert with The Colonel's kept woman.  She asks El Topo to prove
his love to her by duelling four mysterious Masters.  He agrees to do so.
None of these events are linked by recognisable logic.  With either a
sinking heart or a sense of liberation--depending on your taste--you
abandon all hope of making sense of what is going on.
        Events become stranger, until the action seems to exist as an
excuse for a succession of grotesque and memorable images.  Some of these
images are merely parodic: gunfights which end in characters dying
protracted deaths after being shot by an inordinate number of bullets.
Some are absurd and blatant Freudianisms: a woman drinking a jet of water
spurting from a phallic rock in the middle of a desert.  Some are
outrageous and inspired: in a church in a strange town, members of the
congregation prove their faith by taking a gun loaded with a single bullet
from the minister and playing Russian roulette--those who have no faith
die.  And some are small moments of off-the-cuff weirdness: a man with no
arms braids another man's hair with his toes.
        There is much more.  It is simple enough to describe EL TOPO as a
catalogue of freakish, disconnected images, because that is how it unfolds.
On a narrative and thematic level, it never seems to add up, nor does that
seem to be the intention.  The overall effect is, however, wildly
subversive.  Jodorowsky explodes conventions at every turn, upsetting
preconceived notions of gender and character.  Women kiss women.  Men kiss
men.  Men dress up as women.  Men speak with the voices of women, and vice
versa.  The protagonist dies, and is reborn, his black hair now white, and
he becomes a benign pilgrim instead of a murderous gunslinger.  All is in
flux.
        The gunslinger's rebirth divides the movie in two.  The second half
is better; it seems more purposeful.  El Topo comes to life in a cavern,
inhabited by crippled, misshapen, and otherwise deformed people.  They are
trapped, wishing to escape to a nearby town.  El Topo shaves his head, dons
a monkish robe, leaves the cavern with his midget attendant, and goes to
the town.  It is inhabited by people dressed in incongruous Victorian
clothing.  They act out strange parodies of recognisable social
situations--a church service, a boxing match, a brothel--as if their
behaviour is twisted out of true by the force of the primal urges they are
striving to contain.
        El Topo's actions lead to an apocalyptic finale: a confrontation
between the "civilized" folk of the town and those who have emerged, like
insects, from their hole in the mountain, the very embodiment of the
marginalized and repressed of society.  This is the return of the
unconscious, with a vengeance.  Jodorowsky's sympathies are clearly with
the outcasts.  His film stands in relation to mainstream cinema as the
pariahs do to the townfolk.  It reveals what the majority prefers to keep
concealed.  It embraces the physical in all its manifestations, human and
animal, beautiful and grotesque.  It is saturated with acts of violence,
blood, sex, bodies of all kinds.
        It is unlikely that anyone will ever call EL TOPO a perfect movie.
In some sense, it is not even a good movie.  But it is unique.  And while
good movies are plentiful, unique movies are, by definition, one of a kind,
and so to be cherished.   The presence of other directors can be
felt--Fellini, Bu≈Ñuel, and, in the Western-derived material, Sergio
Leone--but even if those filmmakers had never made a single movie, one
senses that EL TOPO would look much as it does now.  It is the work of a
man possessed by not one vision but by a thousand: a man who wants to cram
them all into two hours, and will use whatever internal logic suits his
purposes to achieve that end.
        The result is a kind of divine madness, celebratory in its excess.
Werner Herzog, one of the other great mad visionaries of the cinema, has
said that the twentieth century is starved for great images.  If we are
starving, then EL TOPO is like the miracle of the loaves and fishes: with a
few primitive ingredients, it can nourish multitudes.
        Review by David Dalgleish (subjective.freeservers.com) -- February
9th, 2000
