Title
Review for Tonari no Totoro (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
Produced, Directed, and Written by Hayao Miyazaki
1988 (1993, American release), color, 87 minutes
     I'm an anime fan.  Yes, that's right, one of those people who
religiously collects Japanese animation by methods of sometimes dubious
legality, huddles in dark screening rooms at science-fiction
conventions to get my "fix," complains prodigiously about dubs
(especially those from Streamline), and is probably looked upon rather
oddly by most of the people I know because of it.
     As I said, I tend to complain prodigiously about dubs, especially
those done by Streamline.  As such, it's probably more than a little
surprising to you that I'm rating this particular Streamline dub so
highly.  I know it's *damn* surprising to me.
     You see, Streamline has this annoying little habit of *changing*
the lines that they're supposed to be dubbing.  The most notable
example that comes to mind is when Goemon the samurai cuts Lupin's
burning clothes off of him in the movie LUPIN III: CASTLE OF
CAGLIOSTRO.  In the original, he says afterward, "Once again, I've cut
a worthless object."  In the Streamline dub, he says, "Should've worn
an asbestos suit."  And the president of Streamline, Carl Macek, has
stated that he will never subtitle any of his films.  Purist that I am,
I find this kind of thing totally unacceptable, so I was, to say the
least, highly dubious of Totoro.
     What made the CAGLIOSTRO dub all the more disappointing was the
fact that the movie was one of my favorites in the subtitled format.
It was a Hayao Miyazaki film, and Miyazaki is my favorite anime
creator.  He's done some truly beautiful films--CAGLIOSTRO, LAPUTA:
CASTLE IN THE SKY, KIKI'S DELIVERY SERVICE, NAUSICAA OF THE VALLEY OF
THE WIND, and MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO, to name a few.  It is sadly ironic
that Streamline got its hands on most of these, and thus no "decent"
commercial version will ever be produced.
     Anyway, enough Streamline bashing; that isn't the point of this
review.  As I've said, I was skeptical of TOTORO, even though some
friends and acquaintances told me it was quite good.  However, since
Miyazaki *is* my favorite director, I knew I would eventually have to see
it.  But as my concession to myself before seeing a Streamline dub (an
act which tends to make me come away feeling rather dirty), I decided
to obtain and view the fan-subtitled version first.  Thus, I watched
the TOTORO fansub one night and the TOTORO commercial dubbed release
the next.
     Even though TOTORO is touted as a children's movie (and a very
good children's movie it is, too), is is a film that will likely
enthrall and at the very least not bore (or, for that matter,
nauseate--Barney, anyone?) any grown-ups who watch it too.  The story
is fairly simple--two young girls and their father move into a house in
the Japanese countryside to be closer to their hospitalized mother, and
the girls meet and befriend the magical creatures that live in the
forest nearby.  But there's more to this film than that.  My Neighbor
Totoro gives us sort of a window into Japanese culture, painting a
picture of life amid the rice paddies that is filled with all the
wonder and magic it has when seen through the eyes of a child.  It's
not my favorite Miyazaki story, but I couldn't help but be entranced by
its simple charm all the same.  Miyazaki always does that to me.
     One thing about Miyazaki is that he likes to make references to
other films.  For example, in both LAPUTA: CASTLE IN THE SKY and an
episode of the "Lupin" TV series that he directed, a robot is featured
that looks remarkably similar to one from a 1930s Fleischer Superman
short.  In MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO there are references to at least a couple
of children's movies--namely, MARY POPPINS and ALICE IN WONDERLAND.  I
had to smile.
     As I've said, I was quite skeptical up to the moment when I put
the dub into the VCR and pressed play.  My skepticism began its
immediate decline when the opening theme began playing.  As this is a
children's movie, it was to be expected that the music would be
translated into English, and I was half-expecting some sort of stupid
kiddie song that would be entirely unrelated to the spirit of the
original.  But as soon as the theme began, my jaw dropped, for they had
somehow managed to translate that song almost *excatly*.  The English
singer even sounded like the original Japanese one!
     And it was thus throughout the entire film.  Not only were the
translations nearly flawless but even the voice-acting was dead-on!  My
friend had said to me that the voices in the English version sounded
just like the voices in the Japanese version.  And they did!  The
translations were 98% accurate--even trivial lines that weren't
important to the story were often rendered correctly.  By the time the
closing credits had rolled, I had realized that my fansubbed copy of
this movie was going to be gathering a lot of dust.
     A brief summary of the most noticeable differences between the
original and the dubbed versions:  The opening and closing songs are in
English, as I've said.  The minor elements of Buddhism (the religion
usually depicted in anime) have been removed: where in the original the
older sister prays at a shrine to let them take shelter from the rain
there, she now asks, "Would it be all right if we stay here?"; where an
old lady was chanting a prayer to Buddha she is now murmuring in the
style of someone praying under her breath.  The film has been
pan-and-scanned, as well.
     One thing which particularly relieves me is that Carl Macek didn't
pull any of his usual "hide-the-kanji-at-all-costs" tricks which so
often make the opening credits of movies he dubs look like crud.  (In
order to hide the Japanese symbols in the Castle of Cagliostro opening
credits, for example, he slowed down the opening animation and reframed
parts of the picture, and it looked utterly disgusting.) In the scenes
where a bus's sign changes to indicate its destination, he dubbed in a
voice (provided, so I'm told, by Carl himself) that said, "Next
stop..."  In one instance a subtitle is provided for translation.  As
many instances of kanji as there are in this film, I'm glad he didn't
try to hide them this time.
     Another thing which relieves me is that none of the names are
changed.  All the original Japanese names are still used, and even
pronounced properly, as far as I know (I especially like the way the
older sister pronounces "Totoro").  This is one more element that adds
to the general Japanese ambiance of this movie.  It makes me feel as
though the characters actually *are* Japanese, but I just happen to be
able to understand them for some mysterious reason.  Very few dubs have
ever done that for me.
     And now I've reached the point where, in summing up, I'm probably
supposed to draw upon those phrases that have become cliches by virtue
of repeated use in magazine movie reviews and inclusion on the backs of
video boxes.  Things like "This is a magical film for all ages," for
example.  But I'm not trying to advertise this movie; it's not like I'm
going to make money off of it or anything.  So, I'll just sum up with a
few observations, instead.
     This is one of very few dubs that I would not feel ashamed to show
to other people.  It maintains the integrity of the original almost to
the last detail.  The film itself is easily comparable to some of
Disney's best, with an attention to detail that Disney sometimes
lacks.
     If you're looking for something you can show the kiddies that
won't have them karate-chopping around the house afterward, get MY
NEIGHBOR TOTORO.  If you're a fan of good animation yourself, get MY
NEIGHBOR TOTORO.  If nothing else, rental will only cost a buck or two,
and trust me--the experience is more than worth it.
(This review is copyright 1995 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Distribution is
okay as long as it's not for profit and this notice remains intact. 
Distribution on CD-ROM is verboten without Chris's permission, however.)

Author
Robert Plamondon
An animated feature film, written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki
Rated G, 1:25 running time
I give it four stars out of a possible five.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is a charming children's film by Japan's
leading animator, Hayao Miyazaki.  Set in rural Japan in the 1950s, it
is a story about two little girls and their father, who move into an
old farmhouse and quickly discover that it is haunted.  Later, they
encounter Totoro, a giant, vaguely rabbit-like magical creature who
lives in a hollow in the enormous camphor tree next door.
     A series of delightful adventures ensue, from magical encounters
with Totoro, to run-ins with the boy next door who loses the ability to
speak in the presence of girls.  Real-world concerns intrude heavily at
times: the girls' father bought the country house to benefit their
mother, who is recovering at a nearby hospital, presumably from
tuberculosis.  All these elements are woven tightly together in the
movie.
     One unusual element of the story is how the adults react to
reports of magical creatures in the neighborhood.  While it's a little
hard to tell whether the adults REALLY believe in them, they all take
reports of Totoros and Soot Sprites in perfect stride.  Not once does
Miyazaki trot out the hoary children's literature chestnut of "the
adults think I'm a liar, so I'm going to have to save the world by
myself."  This accepting attitude towards traditional Japanese
spirit-creatures may well represent an interesting difference between
our two cultures.
     Originally released in Japan in 1988, MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO has been
competently (but not brilliantly) dubbed into English.  (Many dubbed
Japanese films have such bad voice acting that the films are painful to
watch.  TOTORO doesn't suffer from this problem.) The lip-synch is
probably better than in the original Japanese.
     Unlike the ultra-expensive, all-singing, all-dancing,
effects-laden, weak-script extravaganzas put out by Disney recently,
the film concentrates on story, characterization, and cinematography.
     Disney, for example, wanted a wonderful ballroom scene in BEAUTY
AND THE BEAST, and conveniently forgot that the castle was under a
curse that changed its appearance to be gloomy and forbidding.  Such
deliberate errors, always present in recent Disney films, are
conspicuously absent from Miyazaki's work.  MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO hearkens
back to an era of simpler, more honest Disney films, like 101
DALMATIONS.
     Like 101 DALMATIONS, the animation in MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is not as
smooth or as detailed as recent Disney works, but it is a classic
nonetheless.
     When watching MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO in a theater, I was impressed at
the way the kids in the audience were glued to the screen the entire
time.  Certain scenes, such as when Mei, the five-year-old girl,
discovers pollywogs in a pond, brought smiles to the faces of the
adults -- but shouts of excitement from the kids in the audience.
Miyazaki has their number.
     The wonderfully detailed characterizaton and the charming story
make MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO a delight for adults as well.

Author
Eric Walker
     Hayao Miyazaki is one of the most popular animators in Japan.  He
makes animated feature films with a strong appeal to the entire family;
young kids can watch his movies as well as grown-ups.  This, plus the
fact that he draws heavily on Western sources for his stories, has
attracted the attention of fans of Japanese animation fans here in
America, who want his movies to reach as wide an audience over here as
they do in Japan.
     A few of Miyazaki's animated works have been translated into
English and released on video, but they've had no major impact on
American audiences, children or otherwise.  Now another attempt is
being made to introduce Japanese animation (called "anime" - pronounced
AN-ee-may - by the Japanese and Japanimation fans) to America.  Troma
Pictures, the company that made a name for itself after producing such
deliberately awful movies as THE TOXIC AVENGER and SURF NAZIS MUST DIE,
is trying to shed its schlock-film image (perhaps they're finding
themselves trapped by it) by forming a new movie distribution arm
called 50th Street Films.  The first film to be released to theaters by
this new company is Miyazaki's MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO, an animated feature
film that was one of the biggest box- office hits of the past few years
in Nippon.  While this new project has absolutely no chance of toppling
Disney from the throne, it's given us a chance to see a delightful
fantasy film for children that might have otherwise gone completely
unnoticed.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is the story of two young children, ten-year-
old Satsuki and her sister Mei, who move with their father to a house
in the Japanese countryside.  As they acquaint themselves with their
new home, they get the feeling that the house is haunted by mysterious
"dust bunnies" - spirits that gather in old houses and that are
dispersed by laughter.  Their suspicions prove true, and they meet
Totoro, an ancient spirit living in a giant tree by their house.
Totoro is a huge, furry creature that looks like a ten-foot-tall cross
between a rabbit and a pillow; he takes the children on a magical
journey through the forest that's full of wonder and laughs.
     Anime has been appearing on American video shelves, though its
appeal has largely been to the teenage action-flick market: most
Japanese animated films (such as the popular AKIRA) are full of robots,
guns, women with large breasts and lots and lots of graphic violence.
Fans of this type of animation will avoid MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO like the
plague, because it's a quiet story that will appeal mostly to young
children and their parents.  If you watch this movie expecting guns and
death, forget it.
     However, if you're a parent with young children, or you're just a
person who likes watching movies with good animation and good stories,
you'll be pleased with TOTORO.  It's a far cry from THE CARE BEARS,
because not only will your children be entranced by it - you'll enjoy
it, too!  You'll chuckle with glee when little Mei encounters a "dust
bunny" spirit for the first time, and when Totoro helps the children
make the seeds in their garden sprout, and when they take a ride in a
delightful, living Cat-bus that reminds one of the Cheshire Cat.
(Several elements of this story are taken from "Alice In Wonderland,"
including Mei's fall down the rabbit hole into Totoro's Wonderland.)
You'll smile all throughout the movie - and I'd much rather enjoy a
children's story than wince at sickly-sweet treacle such as we get with
MY LITTLE PONY or Barney the Dinosaur.
     The film is not all sweetness and light: the children's mother is
in the hospital, being treated for an illness, and while there's
nothing here as shocking as the death of Bambi's mother, the climax of
the film where Mei runs away and Satsuki searches desperately for her
may cause anxiety among small children.  But it certainly won't
traumatize them for life - and there's a happy ending that everyone
will be sure to love.
     In addition, the animation is done with care and love.  The
opening credits look very silly, and parents may wonder what they're in
for when they watch them, but once the credits are over the movie is
lushly animated, with beautiful, realistic scenery and many delightful
touches, such as a cluster of pollywogs in a pond or Totoro making it
rain by stomping on the ground and shaking rain off of the trees.
There's no computer animation here (Miyazaki prefers the traditional
hand-drawn method of animation), but while the animation may not be as
dazzling as that in THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER or ALADDIN, it's very well
done nonetheless.
     Also of note is the transition from Japanese into English.
Dubbing into another language is always difficult, especially with
children's films, because the voice actors in these films often sound
like thirty-year-olds trying sound like children.  That's not the case
here: the voices here come from the same company that dubbed other
Japanese animated films, such as GUNBUSTER, but this time they've taken
the care to sound more like children and less like squealing
grown-ups.  The dialogue is good; you won't wince with embarrassment
from the translation.  Some films, such as LAPUTA, are sometimes
unintentionally funny by using ridiculous phrases to simulate the
movement of the character's mouths - as when two children are falling
down a hole and one says to the other "We can go all the way!" There's
none of that here.  This is one of the best dubbing jobs of a Japanese
animated film I've seen, and I applaud the effort taken to make it
sound right.
     Because of the language barrier (and the fact that Disney has a
near-monopoly on animated feature films in this country), it's been
difficult to introduce Miyazaki's films to American moviegoers.  But
his fans have made some progress: Streamline Pictures, a company formed
especially to translate and distribute Japanese animated films in
America, has managed to get a couple of Miyazaki's movies to play in
American art-house theaters.  THE CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO, a wild and
hilarious James Bond type of adventure starring a noble thief called
"The Wolf" (his Japanese name is Lupin III), was subtitled and played
at art houses across the country; I saw it at the Brattle Theater in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, where it played to a packed house and
received loud applause from the audience.  LAPUTA: CASTLE IN THE SKY,
one of Miyazaki's most enchanting films (and one of my personal
favorites), was dubbed into English and likewise sent to art-house
theaters.  But outside of anime fandom, these movies have had
absolutely no impact on the mainstream moviegoing audience, whose sole
idea of going to the movies consists of heading to the local mall to
see ALADDIN and SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is suffering from the same lack of exposure.
Troma Films failed to land a major distribution contract with any of
the major Hollywood studios, and thus they're reduced to sending a few
prints to theaters across the country.  Not many people are going to
have the chance to see this movie on the big screen - and if it does
come to their town, there won't be any TV commercials or big ads in the
newspaper, and it might pass them by completely.  Keep a close eye out
for this one, and if you see it at a theater, take the kids and go.
But even so, you might sit in a near-empty theater.
     The best thing to do is wait for the video release - probably by
Christmas of this year.  When it appears, rent MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO and
watch it with your children.  You're in for a treat.
.

