Title
Review for Masquerade (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
"Maquerade," is one of those films where the characters are not always 
who you think they are, and one in which double crosses is its key plot 
point in which everything else stems from. Made in 1988, this film 
preceded the more recent overabundance of these types of films, but it 
is exactly the same, although not nearly as skillful as some of the best 
examples in the well-worn genre.
The film begins with Olivia Lawrence (Meg Tilly), an extremely wealthy 
and single young woman, graduating from college. We learn all of her 
money has come from the deaths of both of her parents, and she was also 
left eight houses throughout the world. She lives in a mansion in the 
New York bay area, and legally cannot throw out her mother's last 
husband (John Glover), a greasy slimeball who is always bringing various 
strange women home with him. Right after graduation, Olivia meets two 
men, a friend from her childhood (Doug Savant) who is now a police 
officer, and the handsome yacht captain, Tim Whalan (Rob Lowe), who 
unbeknownst to Olivia, also has another girlfriend on the side. 
Should Olivia trust Tim? Does he really love her, or just after her 
inheritance? And how is her friend from the past connected with 
everyone, if he is at all? These are some of the mysteries brought up 
in, "Masquerade," a film that sounds potentially more interesting than 
it actually is. One of the picture's main problems is that all of the 
characters are left at a distance from the audience, and so no one is 
able to truly gain our sympathies, or to even give us much of an opinion 
on any of them to begin with. I did not find myself being enthralled in 
the story, because it felt more like a dream that a person can only 
remember parts of, and so they tell you about it with big chunks of the 
plot missing. Developments in the narrative occurred, and yet the film 
seemed to be drifting by things without any attention to the elements 
around them, as if the twisting storyline was the only important key to 
making a successful film.
Meg Tilly has shown that she is a fine actress, just like her younger 
sister, Jennifer. Look no further than 1983's "The Big Chill," or 1985's 
"Agnes of God," and you will see a versatile, always impressive, actor 
at work. In, "Masquerade," however, Tilly either chose or was directed 
to act like a passive female, and this was a highly misguided choice. 
Since she doesn't appear to be using her mind to figure out the sinister 
things going on around her, then how does director Swaim expect us to 
root for her? Rob Lowe and Doug Savant, who may or may not be working in 
cahoots with each other, are OK, but honestly nothing more than two 
pretty faces. John Glover, usually an outstanding character actor 
(1989's "Longtime Companion"), plays an obvious one-dimensional villain 
for his relatively short-lived appearance. Finally, both other female 
performers, Kim Cattrall, as Lowe's on-the-side girlfriend, and Dana 
Delaney, as Glover's companion, like Tilly, are written at a 
condescending level, and are treated unfairly as nothing more than women 
whose primary goal is sex. I wonder if Swaim intentionally wrote all of 
his women characters to act like dimwits, or if it just happened that 
way, because he certainly does not flatter them in any way.
It is amazing how quickly-paced things occur in, "Maquerade," and yet, 
how slow-moving it actually feels to watch. On my first viewing, I found 
my mind constantly wandering from the proceedings because nothing was of 
any substantial interest to me. It was only on my second run-through of 
the film, immediately afterwards, that I actually understood what all of 
the character's motives were. If anything, "Masquerade," is an 
appropriate title. Just like the storyline, the film itself tries to 
desperately cloak itself so its viewers don't realize how very little 
worthwhile material is actually present.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
