Title
Review for Who Killed Atlanta's Children? (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "WHO KILLED ATLANTA'S CHILDREN?" (Showtime
TV - Sunday, July 16, and Wed., July 19, at 8 P.M. )
  "It's not quite justice, but it's a start..." notes James
Belushi at the conclusion of this powerful, provocative exploration of
the conspiracy and cover-up that diverted the search for the truth in
the Atlanta child murders of 1979-1981. Belushi and Gregory Hines play
two Spin magazine journalists who went to Atlanta in pursuit of
answers to a case that had left frustrated mothers, haunted by grief.
"There's something hanging over this town," Hines says. "I can feel
it." While Wayne Williams was convicted of some of the slayings, it
was obvious that he was not the primary culprit and parents of the
slain African-American children were critical of the way the case was
abruptly closed.  Integral to the reporters' investigation are tips
from an Atlanta police officer about the incompetence of 14 different
law enforcement agencies, including the Georgia Bureau of
Investigation and the FBI. That leads them to uncover the secret
investigation Task Force which developed evidence from reliable
informants that members of a Ku Klux Klan "Death Squad" were involved
as part of a child prostitution ring.  Meanwhile, both men - husbands
and fathers - are concerned that their own families may be in danger,
particularly when they're run off the road in a terrifying encounter
with angry locals one night. On the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Who Killed Atlanta's Children?" is a sad, controversial 7.
Writer/director Charles Robert Carner reveals that this secret
investigation actually occurred but that some names and some details
have been changed. Wayne Williams' appeal case is currently going
through the legal process before the Georgia courts.
