Title
Review for Bonjour tristesse (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
These days teenagers are supposed to get famous by making
successful careers as pop singers, actors or fashion models
or, if everything else fails, by gunning down their
classmates. It is almost inconceivable for teenager to reach
fame by writing best-seller books. In 1954 French author
FranÂ‡oise Sagan did just that, by writing novel BONJOUR
TRISTESSE and becoming household name before her 20th
birthday. The novel was so influential that even Hollywood
got interested and four years later Otto Preminger directed
its screen adaptation.
The protagonist of the film is Cecile (played by Jean
Seberg), sixteen-year old girl who lives in Paris together
with her rich playboy father Raymond (played by David
Niven). Accustomed to all kinds of luxury, Cecile not only
approves, but also actually encourages Raymond's decadent
lifestyle that involves constant womanising. Two of them are
going to spend one summer at their luxurious villa at French
Riviera, accompanied by Raymond's latest girlfriend Elsa
(played by Mylene Demongeot). Summer idyll is interrupted
with the arrival of Anne (played by Deborah Kerr), Raymond's
old love interest, which came to visit their villa. Even the
briefest of encounters is enough to re-ignite romance
between Anne and Raymond. Soon, Elsa is out of the picture
and Raymond and Anne announce their intention to marry.
Cecile at first doesn't mind, but when Anne begins
establishing her control over Raymond and endangering
Cecile's carefree lifestyle, she becomes jealous. Her
animosity towards Anne would lead her to conduct romantic
intrigue with unexpected consequences.
The plot of this film, as well as its setting - closed
circle of idle rich people whose lives are one big endless
party - is hardly original, and it was used in thousands of
soap operas. Director Otto Preminger was quite aware of the
shallowness of content, and tried his best to mimic it with
style. BONJOUR TRISTESSE is nicely photographed, features
good costumes, pretty locations of French Riviera and nice
musical score by Gabriel Auric (although the title theme,
sung by Juliette Greco, seems somewhat overplayed). The
acting is very good - Jean Seberg is quite convincing as
spoiled and cruel teenage brat, and Deborah Kerr does her
best to make her character attractive to Raymond despite
having competition in girl with half of her age. David
Niven, on the other hand, seems quite relaxed in the role of
charming playboy that almost became his trademark. Even
Mylene Demongeot brings some texture and charm to terribly
stereotypical role of brainless bimbo. Unfortunately,
Preminger sometimes likes to experiment too much and allows
such experiments to get in the way of the story. His idea to
make contrast between Cecile's past in the Riviera with her
present and equally shallow life in Paris by using shooting
the latter in black and white seems somewhat snobbish. He
also uses Cecile's voiceover narration that is often
monotonous and tells the obvious. However, although such
experiments fail, BONJOUR TRISTESSE is still very good film
to watch - Hollywood soap opera at its best, nicely done and
still entertaining after many decades.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
