Title
Review for I skugga Hrafnsins (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A dispute between two clans in ancient Iceland threatens to turn into a
war.  Will a marriage stop the fighting, or will the corrupt Bishop
prevail?  A drama of trust, love, power, and revenge, based on the
legend of Tristan and Isolde.  Very good, although it is slow-moving at
times.
Iceland/Sweden (English subtitles), color, 1988, 118 minutes.
Director/Writer:  Hrafn Gunnlaugsson
     The story is set in Iceland, in the year 1077.  Christianity has
replaced the old Norse religions, and the Church is, besides the clan,
the major power in society.  Trausti (Icelandic for Tristan) returns
home after studying theology in Norway to find himself caught in the
middle of a clan struggle over rights to a beached whale.  Trausti's
clan found the whale, but it was beached in an area belonging to the
other clan.
     A battle ensues, and the leader of the opposing clan is killed in
the fight.  Isolde, the beautiful daughter of the slain clan leader, is
taken prisoner in the battle.  Inasmuch as Isolde believes that Trausti
killed her father, she is determined to get revenge.  The fighting is
reported to the Church, and the local Bishop gets involved.
     The Bishop turns out to be very corrupt and devious.  Trausti
manages to convince Isolde of his innocence; they plan to marry to stop
the fighting.  The Bishop opposes this, for he wanted his son to marry
Isolde, thereby increasing his power base.  The story continues with
preparations for the wedding as the Bishop considers various evil
schemes.
     This film presents a dramatic study in the use and abuse of power
(clan dispute, actions of the Bishop), revenge and love (the
relationship between Trausti and Isolde) and, most of all, trust.
Trausti often trusted people.  Sometimes his trust was justified,
sometimes not, with resultant tragic consequences.
     From a technical viewpoint, the film is only average.  It appears
to have a modest budget (no lavish sets, small cast), and the acting is
average.  The photography is good, although the "star" is sometimes the
spectacular landscape of Iceland!  Further, the film really drags in the
middle.
     What makes the film very good, instead of just average, is the
message it conveys, and the final (exciting, shocking) 30 minutes.  As I
was watching it, I was ready to write the film off as mediocre, when it
suddenly got very dramatic and interesting.  Patience has its rewards!
Distribution.  Not in general U.S. release at the present time.  Most
likely places to see it are film festivals, societies, or archives.
Print Source: Jupiter Distribution, Inc., 8670 Wilshire Blvd., Beverly
Hills, California 90211.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
