Title
Review for Todos los hombres sois iguales (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Leo Bueno
     Spanish cinema has fallen in a groove, a nice groove; YOU MEN ARE
ALL THE SAME (a.k.a., TODOS LOS HOMBRES SOIS IGUALES) is a fine
example of it.  The general framework is that of refreshingly witty
dialogue (in the context of slightly improbable situations) which
envelops pathetic aspects of the characters' lives.  One suspects that
the production companies which assemble these films are a little short
on cash, however, they are long on skill and talent.
     YOU MEN follows along the path carved by BELLE EPOQUE, AY
CARMELA!, WHY DO THEY CALL IT LOVE WHEN THEY MEAN SEX (same director as
YOU MEN), JAMON JAMON, and probably a few others which I did not get
around to seeing (note in this list the absence of Almodovar's films,
which I generally find much ballyhooed, greatly overrated, and
gratuitously shocking).  Spanish filmmaking of late is in part a
response to the change in the country's political climate.
     Thank God Francisco Franco died, so Spanish cinema could shake the
old and tired little Joselito and Sara Montiel didactic musicals and
produce movies which show life as it probably is.  Yes, Generalisimo,
wherever you happen to be, men and women do break one of the
Commandments on a regular basis with each other.
     One not necessarily disquieting aspect of the style (at least from
this reviewer's politically incorrect male perspective) seems to be the
casting of at least two great looking women, one of whom at some point
in the film bears her boobs.  Franco must be twirling in his royal
grave.  Unfortunately, sometimes Spanish directors throw in scenes
whose shock value far outweigh their aesthetic merit.  In YOU MEN,
there is a shot of one of the protagonists missing his urinary
porcelain mark; it crossed the artistic necessity line; it brought
memories of Almodovar's unwarranted depiction of a woman in a similar
situation, albeit with much better aim.
     YOU MEN is the story of three recently divorced thirty something
men--a pilot, a sports broadcaster, and an architect--who share an
apartment.  Less than adequate domestic skills compel them to hire a
non-resident housekeeper.  She is a shapely and beautiful young woman,
driven by single motherhood into this less than ideal and unbecoming
profession.  The movie chronicles the relationships among the men,
their ex-wives, their children, and the housekeeper.
     One may simplistically characterize this movie as a twist on THREE
MEN AND A BABY; it would be unfair; it is not so.  This film is not
concerned with the mechanics of the men's new domestic lives; it deals
with their emotions during a difficult part of their existence.  This
movie is not about juggling roommates, household utensils, and living
spaces; it is about managing the aftermath of divorce, and its pain.
The only drawback to the movie is that some of the comedy is a little
too physical; not quite Jerry Lewis material, but a bit too harsh for
its other fine elements.
     The relationship between the men and their ex-wives encompasses
the post-dissolution of marriage spectrum.  One can't stay away from
the ex-wife (and she obliges sexually); one grins, bears and tolerates
her antics; one even attempts physical violence against the ex-wife's
business establishment.
     Although the title implies a feminine perspective, YOU MEN's
director is a man.  He (sometimes through trite sketches and themes:
wife running away with lawyer; men at party huddling to watch sports
videos; man gawking at bent-over woman) portrays men as lusting
romantic bumbling idiots; however, he subtly paints women as cunning
calculating mean-spirited predators, on balance, much less favorably.
     The scene you will remember from this film will not make you
laugh.  You will remember the pilot's son's incontinence, brought on by
the parents' ugly bickering.  There is pain and suffering in divorce;
there is no honest cinematic way to soften the harshness of its
effect.
