Title
Review for Relentless IV: Ashes to Ashes (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Serial killers seem to think of Los Angeles as their most
popular hunting ground. LAPD detective Sam Dietz (played by
Leo Rossi), protagonist of the RELENTLESS series of films,
however, does everything in his power to stop them and
through the years he gained enough experience to solve even
the most complicated cases. In RELENTLESS IV: ASHES TO
ASHES, fourth and final sequel, directed by Olley Sassone in
1994, Dietz would again be subjected to difficult ordeal
when L.A. women become prey of vicious serial killer.
Dietz's investigation is hampered by problems on the
personal front -rows with his rebellious teenager son Cory
(played by Christopher Pettiet), and the fact that he is
simultaneously attracted to two beautiful women - his
inexperienced partner Jessy Paretti (played by Colleen
Coffey) and Doctor Sara Lee Jaffee (played by Famke
Janssen), psychotherapist that might be linked to the case.
RELENTLESS IV: ASHES TO ASHES doesn't bring anything
particularly new or exciting to the genre of serial killer
movies. However, the script by Mark Sevi, although not
spared of some cliches (including romantic and "killer
preying on detective's family" subplots), looks refreshingly
dark compared to similar movies. Director Sassone keeps all
those confusing and complicated subplots nicely wrapped
within 91 minutes limit, and the acting is more than fine.
Leo Rossi can play the role of Dietz in his sleep and
Janssen is quite believable psychotherapist, not allowing
her good looks to overshadow complexity of her role. All in
all, RELENTLESS IV: ASHES TO ASHES looks like a fine piece
of film, which is surprisingly rare achievement for the
fourth sequel in the B movie franchise, at least in 1990s
Hollywood.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
