Title
Review for Wilder Napalm (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Every Hollywood star fears the moment when their drawing
power at the box-office starts to disappear. For two of the
big1980s names - Dennis Quaid and Debra Winger - such moment
came in 1993 when they starred in WILDER NAPALM,
supernatural comedy directed by Glenn Gordon Caron. While it
isn't unusual thing for a film to collapse at the
box-office, few of them became so obscure as this one did.
The protagonists of WILDER NAPALM are two Foudroyant
brothers who share pyrokinesis - ability and are able to
start fires with their own thoughts. Thing that they don't
share is the character. Wilder (played by Arliss Howard) is
introvert who wants to live a like a normal man and doesn't
want anything to do with his gift. More extrovert Wallace
(played by Dennis Quaid) have chosen the path of circus
performer. After many years two brothers meet and realise
that they share another thing - lust towards the same woman,
Vida (played by Debra Winger), who is pyromaniac. Since Vida
happens to be Wilder's wife, the never resolved conflicts
between the brothers are going to heat up.
The name which is usually associated with WILDER NAPALM
belongs to Vince Gilligan, screenwriter who later became one
of the most popular members of THE X-FILES writing team,
responsible for the more romantic and humorous episodes of
that TV show. In his first major movie script he shows great
ability to mix supernatural themes with romantic comedy -
combination that, judging by the abysmal results of
PRACTICAL MAGIC, can often lead to disastrous results.
Gilligan's approach (which is going to be employed by THE
X-FILES and myriad of similar shows) is to view supernatural
from the perspective of normal people who have to experience
such phenomena on regular basis. Gilligan's script is helped
by the great cast - both Winger and Quaid are very good in
their roles, although relatively less known Arliss Howard
steals the show. Unfortunately, the director Glenn Gordon
Caron was not exactly up to the task. The film was too slow
in the beginning and too rapid in the finale, and the comic,
light-hearted tone was compromised with extremely serious
scenes that draw WILDER NAPALM to the territory of drama.
Thankfully, those moments don't last too long and this
obscure little film is nevertheless going to entertain those
who give it a chance.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
