Title
Review for Olympia 2. Teil - Fest der Sch√∂nheit (1938)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Malatzky
We all know that Leni Reifenstahl was a great filmaker but dealt in a
sordid subject (Triumph of the Will) that eternally put a black mark
against her name.
This film, which is the 85 minute second part of the film commisioned by
the 1936 Olympic Committee is a work of pure genius. The photography,
the music, the editing specifically will never be equalled because no
director of genius will ever make a film of the Olympics again and that
is required to equal something like this. I have yet to see part one but
I read that it is 3 hours in total.
Besides what I mentioned, 3 segments come in for special mention. The
Decathalon won by Glenn Morris of the US, The Modern pentathalon and the
equstrian. What really brings it home is the specatcle of military
officers competing for all these nations that would ultimately be
invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany competing on horses in both the MP
and the  Equestrian. And seeing those Nazi officers at the jumps while
their soon to be enemies are jumping over fences and particularly the
great scene with the jump into the river with all the competitors flying
off the horses and face down into the river. I will never forget that.
One thing I noticed was that all events were in the open including
Gymnastics which were certainly in the stone ages in comparison to the
level today.
On the jacket of the video box, it says that Holywood "considered it a
hymn to Hitler's beliefs" and shunned it.At least in this part, I don't
understand where that came from.
