Title
Review for Married to It (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     Three couples, all having marriage problems, meet and become
friends.  There's Nina (Mary Stuart Masterson) and Chuck (Robert Sean
Leonard), a young couple who have just moved into an apartment in New
York.  She's a school psychologist and he's an investment banker who
has run afoul of the law.  Then there's John (Beau Bridges) and Iris
(Stockard Channing), who have been married for years and have two
children.  Products of the sixties, both of them are having varying
degrees of trouble coping with the changes in attitude that have
occurred in the Eighties and Nineties.  Finally, there's Claire (Cybill
Shepherd) and Leo (Ron Silver), whose relationship works more on the
physical than emotional level.  Their marriage is troubled by Claire's
inability to relate to Leo's young daughter.
     MARRIED TO IT is an exercise in mediocrity.  There is nothing
exceptionally hateful or likable in this movie.  This is one of those
rare occasions when I came out of a film completely indifferent to what
I just saw.  If not for this review, I would have forgotten about it
five minutes after the final credits rolled.
     The plot is a series of contrivances lumped together then
truncated with pat endings.  There's nothing inventive or even slightly
original here.  Most of the "deep" subjects tackled by the film have
been touched on more expertly and less cloyingly than in MARRIED TO
IT.  Superficially, in the way this movie tried to ties together the
different lifestyles of its main characters, I was reminded of GRAND
CANYON.  Don't be fooled, though.  This has none of the power of
Lawrence Kasdan's 1991 film.  I can't say it's an poor imitation,
though, even though that's the impression that it gives.  MARRIED TO IT
was filmed back in 1990, before GRAND CANYON.  Because of Orion's
continuing financial problems, it has sat on the shelf until now.  Its
long-delayed and much-troubled release was definitely not worth the
wait.
     The comedy in the film is mostly lame.  There are a few funny
moments, but most of the jokes are real clunkers.  The drama isn't more
solid.  MARRIED TO IT has no concept of what it takes to draw an
audience into a film.  Its sense of character is terrible.  None of the
six principles is particularly engaging, and every relationship in the
movie is plagued by cliche after cliche.  There is absolutely no
chemistry going on, and if you can't care about the characters, what's
the motivation to get involved?
     There's a feeble attempt at social commentary in MARRIED TO IT.
While the subject - the often-devastating effect of divorce on young
children - is important, its handling is so inept that it ends up being
a forgettable throw-in.  Not helping matters is the offhand way in
which this entire element of the plot is routinely dispatched.
     Of the actors, Mary Stuart Masterson turns in the most feeling
performance.  Although clearly inferior to her work in FRIED GREEN
TOMATOES (which was her next project after this one), she manages to
infuse Nina with what can best be described as an "innocent
toughness".  Of the other principles, only Stockard Channing and Ron
Silver do a remotely reasonable job.  Robert Sean Leonard seems lost
half the time, Beau Bridges sleepwalks through his part, and Cybill
Shepherd, with a stilted performance, shows that she's apparently lost
whatever talent she once possessed.  There's no sign of THE LAST
PICTURE SHOW's starlet in this movie.
     Nothing in MARRIED TO IT is done well.  There are problems with
the script, the actors, and the direction.  On the other hand, none of
these deficiencies are so bad that they completely sink the project.
They're unfortunate, but not awful, so instead of the movie being
unwatchable, it's just not memorable.  There's not much here for anyone
to enjoy - or despise.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
