Title
Review for Ivan Groznyj II (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It has come time to review another undiscovered classic of early film.
This one shows up on public television every once in a long while but has
been completely forgotten by anyone who doesn't watch PBS.  The film is
really two Soviet films by Serge Eisenstein, IVAN THE TERRIBLE (Part I) and
IVAN THE TERRIBLE (Part II).  It is difficult to decide if this is really
one film or two.  On one hand, when Part I ends it has more loose ends than
a golf ball with the skin peeled off.  About all that is tied up is the
current sentence.  Talk about leaving room for a sequel!  Eisenstein doesn't
just leave ROOM, he leaves the whole house!  An historical note on
Eisenstein: he appears to be the only Jew revered by the Soviets since Karl
Marx.  Apparently he hid his religion by not asking to leave.
     As with most films about conflict, the IVANs tell the story of the
unending struggle between pretty people and ugly people, with ugly people
being the bad guys.  (This struggle may be more recent than we tend to
think.  In Dickens's time it was more a struggle of people with funny names
such as Twist and Nickleby against people with ugly names such as Mr.
Scrooge or Miss Zits.)  It is only with the more realistic Schwarzenegger
and Stallone films of the 1980s that the good guys are ugly too (and in
Stallone's case they are making up for lost time).  IVAN THE TERRIBLE is the
story of how after an ugly becomes Czar he tries to run Russia for the
peasants, all of whom are pretty.  From a distance Ivan looks ugly: his hair
is greasy and slicked down and he looks like he probably has fleas.  But it
turns out Ivan may not be ugly after all; it may be a plot by his aunt who
has a face like a corn-grinding stone.  It was probably she who put the
Penzoil in his Vitalis.
     The film opens with Ivan's coronation, which is more long and expensive
than it is interesting, but then that is true of a lot of Russian films.
They were made that way to prove to the world that Communism works so well
that they can afford to waste film.  But you know that Ivan is in big
trouble because the place is just teeming with *ugly* people.  There are a
few pretty people who are saying loyal sorts of things, but there are far
more uglies and they are not at all happy that Ivan is being crowned.  Be
warned, however, that some of the pretty people may well turn out to be
villains.  You will know this is happening when the camera starts showing
them in unflattering close-ups.
     Following the coronation there is a reception and banquet that turns
out to be the funniest meal on screen since Blake Edwards's THE PARTY,
except I guess it came before.  During the course of a one-hour meal:
  2.  Ivan's best friend announces he cannot support Ivan and exiles
      himself,
  3.  there is a peasants' revolt where they burn the outskirts of the city,
  5.  Ivan fights with one peasant in hand-to-hand combat,
  7.  the peasants return to their homes, the Mongol ambassador arrives and
      demands tribute,
     The second film has some definite stylistic differences from the first
film.  During the course of making the two films, Eisenstein became more
anti-West as time went along.  By the time he made the second film the
anti-foreigner sentiment is obvious.  He puts much more bright light at the
bottom of the screen so the subtitles will be almost impossible to read.  At
the same time, this makes the plot more complex and harder to follow.
     I wouldn't say this about Part I, but IVAN THE TERRIBLE (Part II) ranks
up there with the original PHANTOM OF THE OPERA, the original HELL'S ANGELS,
THE RETURN OF DRACULA, and SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT as a film that suddenly goes
from black-and-white to color in the middle for no obvious reason.  It is
quite a shock. Presumably the Soviet economy took an upturn during the
shooting.  Unfortunately, the blues on the colored stock have been lost to
time but the reds are somewhere between vibrant and oppressive, much like
Ivan himself.  Part II has enough songs to rank almost as a musical and some
odd dance numbers, including one around a peasant dressed like the Statue of
Liberty.
     The two film together are fairly long but the plot is not difficult to
follow because it moves so slowly.  Other than the banquet scene, in any
given fifteen-minute stretch you can be reasonably sure that not much as
happened.  In fact, even in two films about Ivan, we learn almost nothing
about the man or anything he did.  The snail-paced plot instead gives plenty
of time for meaningful looks and poses.  It is as if every frame was
intended to be a great--if not very realistic--painting.
     In all, I would say that IVAN THE TERRIBLE is two classic films you may
want to see some time.  (Mediocre classics don't get ratings on the -4 to +4
scale.)
