Title
Review for Milk Money (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     MILK MONEY is a smart, funny comedy that presents a very knowing
look at early adolescence while also showing a believable and charming
romance between two unlikely adults.  The film is only slightly
undermined by a somewhat inappropriate climax.
     As the film begins, we meet three pre-teen boys who are just
starting to become facinated and curious about the opposite sex.  They
decide to pool their money and go to nearby New York City because they
had heard there were girls there who would take their clothes off for
money.  There they meet a kindly prostitute played by Melanie
Griffith.  When her car breaks down after driving the boys home, one of
them begins working to bring her together with his lonely, widowed
father.  The premise is difficult to describe in print without making
the film sound kind of lurid, but it is actually handled with a great
deal of sensitivity.  It is also surprisingly believable.
     The greatest strength of John Mattson's screenplay is the very
convincingly drawn characters.  The very first scene of the film
features the three boys up in a treehouse trying to outdo each other
with gross comments.  The scene generates a lot of laughs from the
audience, but these boys also sound like >real

     Griffith's character is also very well written.  She is written as
a good person who has simply ended up in an undesirable lifestyle.  The
film does not glamourize prostitution in any way.  Instead, quite a bit
of time is spent on the dehumanizing aspect of it and on Griffith's
strong wish to get her humanity back.  This film will likely generate
some comparisons with PRETTY WOMAN, and I think its biggest advantage
over that film is the fact that Griffith's character is not rescued by
a client (I suppose you could argue that the kids were "clients", but
not in the same way as the Richard Gere character in PRETTY WOMAN).  In
this film, the character is rightfully shown as needing to get >away

     After giving some teriffic performances early in her career,
Griffith's last several films have been very disappointing.  This is
the best role that she has had since WORKING GIRL and she is absolutely
teriffic in it.  This character is smart and streetwise, but also has a
certain sadness and even a hint of innocence.  The character goes
through a number of emotional transformations during this film and
Griffith plays them all convincingly.  It pleases me immensely to see
her in such a good role once again.
     Ed Harris may seem like an odd choice to play a romantic lead
opposite Griffith, but they have a surprising amount of chemistry.
Harris' character shows a great deal of love and caring towards his
son, but also a certain sadness as he has never quite stopped mourning
his wife (who died in childbirth).  The warm, tentative romance between
Harris and Griffith is very well played and effective.  Harris has
always had a talent for playing characters who seem gruff on the
outside, but with a great deal of warmth between the surface.  This
talent is definitely on display in this character.
     The young actor who plays Harris' son is also very good
(unfortunately, I didn't catch his name and it isn't listed in the
advertisements for the film).  Many of the film's best scenes involve
the slow development of the relationship between Griffith and the boy.
In fact, the film really could have used more scenes between them.  The
son's relationship with the other kids is also very well played.  He is
allowed to take some very tentative first steps towards romance with
some of the other kids his age and this is very realistically played.
The kid had quite a few scenes that brought back childhood memories.
     Unfortunately, Mattson included an unnecessary subplot involving a
mobster (played by Malcolm McDowell, in a seriously over-the-top
performance) trying to find Griffith under the belief that she has
stolen some money from her pimp.  Luckily, this subplot is kept in the
background during most of the film, but it does come to the foreground
during the film's climax.  The result is a climactic sequence where the
romance and characters are largely replaced by unnecessary action
sequences (the film >really

     Richard Benjamin has had a spotty career as a director with films
ranging from dreadful (MY STEPMOTHER IS AN ALIEN) to pretty good
(MERMAIDS).  This is probably his best directing job, showing good
comic timing and bringing out some strong performances.  The film is
also the first project from the new production company founded by
former Spielberg partners Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall and it
shows that they may have been major contributors to the general high
quality of productions that have come out of Amblin Entertainment over
the years.
     While MILK MONEY isn't a perfect film, it is very funny and
entertaining with a surprisingly smart script and some teriffic
performances.  It is very much worth seeing.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MILK MONEY has a lot going for it.  It has two stars I like,
Melanie Griffith and Ed Harris, and has an interesting plot.  If you
have seen the trailers, you know it has a lot of good comedy.
     On the other hand, this is a schizophrenic movie.  It can not make
up its mind if it is a movie for the early teen set or its target
audience is grownups.  Every time the script starts to click in one
direction, it stops entirely and switches.  You get to like the movie
and you start laughing, and then it enters another slump almost as if
it is scared to follow through with the courage of its convictions in
either direction.
     The movie is about a little boy, well played by Michael Carter,
and his 7th grade friends.  They hire a hooker, played poorly by
Melaine Griffith.  Carter tells his Dad, played okay by Ed Harris, that
Griffith is their math tutor.  There is then a gag that runs through
almost all of the show where Harris talks to Griffith about her
profession thinking she is a math tutor while she thinks he knows she
is a hooker.  This part of the plot works very well and produces a lot
of laughs.
     Notice in the show that Harris is shorter than Griffith.  This is
not unusual, but normally, they are careful with the camerawork to mask
the difference by the direction of the shots.  Here it is okay to be a
shorter man.  Even the kids in the show have girlfriends taller than
them.  I especially liked this aspect being to some extent a height
challenged male.
     Much of the show is devoted to a romance between Harris and
Griffith which is not played in a believable fashion, and there is no
real chemistry between them.  There is another boring and unnecessary
subplot about bad guys wanting to find Griffith.  This subplot seems to
be from another movie and to have gotten stuck in this script by
mistake.
     Worst of all is the depiction of what it is like to be a single
Dad.  It depicts cliches of single Daddydom whereby the son and Dad
microwave TV dinners for 100% of their meals and always race, stopwatch
style, to see who can gobble down their dinners the fastest.  The Daddy
has no clue on how to find a woman to date until the kid brings him
one.  Oh yes, and of course, the Dad is also an environmentalist trying
to save part of the world.  Chaining himself to his car to save a swamp
is certainly the low point of the movie.
     I had a pretty good time at the movie since much of the comedy
part did work, but I should point out that if you have seen the
trailers, you have seen half of the jokes already.  I can not bring
myself to actually recommend MILK MONEY, and I give it **.  It runs
1:50 and is rated PG-13 for a little bit of profanity.  Actually, I
think that kids around the 7th grade area would probably get a kick out
of the show and for that age group alone, I would give it a mild thumbs
up.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 2, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Meet the new Worst Movie Of The Year.  This one has no redeeming
features.  That it could be made by Paramount, the same studio that
gave us FORREST GUMP, is another surprise.
     The film opens with twelve-year-old Frank (Michael Patrick Carter)
and two of his friends discussing women and diaphragms.  One of the
friends suggests they gO to the "big city" where women will undress for
money.  They then break into their piggy banks, sell all their toys and
books and with a sack of coins and bills they get on their bikes, off
to the big city.
     They accost well-dressed women on the street with the moronic
question, "Are you a prostitute?"  When they are about to be conned and
robbed by some tramp who takes them into an underground parking lot,
V., (Melanie Griffith) gets out of a car where she had been plying her
trade with an elderly man and conks the tramp over the head with her
shoe, knocking him out.  Little Frank decides he wants to take her home
to marry his widowed dad (Ed Harris).
     Last year we had the delightful SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE with a young
boy (Ross Malinger) trying to get his dad (Tom Hanks) to marry a sweet
woman journalist (Meg Ryan).  (3.5 bytes)
     Last month the story got more unlikely in CORRINA, CORRINA, when
dad (Ray Liotta) is being asked by his daughter (Tina Majorino) to
marry Whoopi Goldberg, their housekeeper. (2 bytes).  And now, dad is
invited to marry a hooker who Frank tells him is his math tutor.
     The more the movie goes on, the more inane it becomes.  It has at
least two unacceptable story goofs but even without that, it is
pitiful.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Melanie Griffith, Ed Harris, Michael Patrick Carter, 
           Malcolm McDowell, Anne Heche 
Director: Richard Benjamin 
Producers:  Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall 
Screenplay:  John Matison 
Music:  Michael Convertino 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Some movies just don't know when enough is enough.  Such is the
case with MILK MONEY, an airheaded romantic comedy that, for some
unfathomable reason, has chosen to incorporate certain action/thriller
elements--car chases, gunplay, explosions--into its mix.  Instead of
enhancing the entertainment value, these things nearly destroy it.
     Fans of PRETTY WOMAN will probably enjoy this motion picture.
MILK MONEY shares a lot with the Julia Roberts/Richard Gere CINDERELLA
fable, including an unfortunate tendency to glamorize prostitution.
Actually, this film isn't as obvious as PRETTY WOMAN on that score.  In
many ways, it's more like (of all the unlikely candidates) LITTLE SHOP
OF HORRORS.  The dreams of Vee (Melanie Griffith) bear a striking
resemblance to those of Audrey--give up streetwalking for a life with
a caring husband "Somewhere that's Green."
     At some point during early adolescence, every boy starts to wonder
about sex.  That's how MILK MONEY opens--with the musings of young
Frank Wheeler (Michael Patrick Carter) and his two friends.  The scenes
of these three together in their tree-house, trying to decide the
purpose of a diaphragm (is it used to stop sperm or cover a bathroom
drain?) and plotting to see a nude woman, are by far the most charming
moments this film has to offer.  They open MILK MONEY with a promise
that quickly fades away.
     Pooling their savings, the trio heads to the nearby "big city" of
Pittsburgh, where anything is rumored to be for sale.  There, they meet
prostitute Vee, who gives them an eyefull for $100.  As the satisfied
adventurers prepare to return to the suburbs, they discover that their
bikes have been stolen.  The ever-helpful Vee agrees to give them a
lift, but when she stops the car outside Frank's house to let him off,
it stalls.
     Going inside to use the phone, Vee meets Frank's dad Tom (Ed
Harris)--and here's where the romantic comedy takes off.  Frank tells
Tom that Vee is a math tutor, an identity mix-up that results in
several conversations loaded with double-entendres (none of which are
exceptionally clever).  Then there's also a subplot involving Malcolm
McDowell as an angry gangster who thinks Vee stole a load of money.
     MILK MONEY is a mixed bag.  Certain scenes work very well, others
are routine, and a few too many fail miserably.  Everything with
Malcolm McDowell should have been excised.  The sinister character he
plays doesn't belong in something this frothy.
     Melanie Griffith generally makes the audience suffer when she
attempts anything dramatic (who could forget SHINING THROUGH or A
STRANGER AMONG US?).  Fortunately, MILK MONEY concentrates on her comic
abilities which, if not ample, are adequate.  There's one embarrassing
scene where she makes a statement that she's a person, not a
possession, but moments of that sort are mercifully kept to a minimum.
     Ed Harris plays Tom with reserve and dignity (he's a science
teacher who's the lone force behind a local effort to preserve a
dwindling tract of wetlands), and the unlikely pairing of him with
Griffith works.  They don't make one of the best screen couples, but
there have been many worse choices in the past few years.
     MILK MONEY is not a detestable motion picture.  On the contrary,
there are a lot of likeable things about it.  The problem is that
"likeable" doesn't always translate into "good."  The film's flaws are
obvious, and frequently detract from the enjoyment of the product.  The
ending, as might be expected, can be thrown away completely.  It's from
the Hollywood school of how to wrap everything neatly in a happy little
package.
     If you intend to see this movie, be wary of how much of your own
hard-earned milk money you're willing to spend.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
