Title
Review for Paul Monette: The Brink of Summer's End (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Chute
By David Chute
        It is sometimes difficult, and perhaps even wrong headed, to
cling to normal critical standards when judging documentaries. The
complex force of something real can be overpowering, even when the
best that can be said is that the filmmaker doesn't impose himself
between the viewer and the material, that he allows it to speak
clearly for itself.
        Monte Bramer's "Paul Monette: The Brink of Summer's End" is a
case in point. A thoroughly conventional clips-and-interviews
documentary; standard TV biography stuff, it is nevertheless a
powerful record of a life devoted stubbornly, even heroically to
self-expression. The power derives from the material rather than the
moviemaking, but that doesn't mean the power isn't real, or
significant.
        An openly gay poet and novelist ("The Long Shot"), Monette won
a National Book Award in 1992 for his memoir "Becoming a Man: Half a
Life Story." At that point he had already lost two lovers to AIDS and
was terminally ill himself. His determination to keep writing every
single day, shuffling to the computer clinging to his IV stand, must
have required huge reserves of physical courage. Monette emerges as a
role model not just for writers, and not just for gay writers; for
anyone inclined to take the freedom to speak and to create for
granted. Monette in one scene displays an "I Am Salman Rushdie" pin
conspicuously on his lapel, a clear indication that he understood, and
fully intended, the larger implications.
        "Becoming a Man" was designed to be the book Monette had
longed to read as a young gay man, but couldn't find, because it
didn't yet exist; a plain-spoken account of shared experience that
rang true and offered useful advice and reassurance. If the
award-winning status of the book means anything (always an open
question), it's that the work transcends its immediate purpose, that
it describes one form of a common human occurrence, and makes its
universality clear. As Monette says here, "We all have a closet we
have to come out of if we are ever going to be free."
        One of the movie's strongest "subplots" is an assessment of
what it cost the writer to arrive at that mature outlook. At the
start, according to his editor, Monette was not so much a man who
wanted to write as a charismatic young go-getter "who wanted to be a
writer;" less a matter of having something urgent to say than of
playing a certain role in the world. In retrospect, it seems, the only
thing missing was a personal experience harrowing enough to stir him
to the core, to burn off the impurities.
        Monette seems to have been transfigured, transmuted into an
artist, by his experience of AIDS, his lovers' and then his own. His
first work of non-fiction, "Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir," was an
unflinching yet affirmative and even romantic account of his life with
his companion of 12 years, attorney Roger Horowitz, and of Roger's
illness and death; a book often cited as the first about the plague to
cross-over strongly to straight readers. For many, it gave the crisis
a human face.
        Will "Borrowed Time" survive as the "Diary of Anne Frank" of
the AIDS scourge, as Monette himself incautiously suggests? It's an
indication of the personal power of his story that we respond to
Monette's most extreme positions (like the equivalence implied here
between AIDS and the Holocaust) not with acceptance, perhaps, but
certainly with understanding. They emerge as consistent extensions of
a personality, as essential components of a full portrait.
        A movie can honestly earn an emotional response in many ways,
and distinguished film technique is only one of them. "I'm not dying
of AIDS," Monette insists, "I'm dying of homophobia." In this film,
and in the most literal possible sense, we can see where Paul Monette
was coming from.
Unrated. Times guidelines: Frank verbal descriptions of gay sex;
scenes of Monette's decline as a victim of AIDS are necessarily
shocking.
"PAUL MONETTE: THE BRINK OF SUMMER'S END"
With Paul Monette, Larry Kramer, Judith Light, Roger Horowitz, Stephen
Kolzak, Winston Wilde, Star Black, 
A presentation of First Run Features. Director/Writer Monte Bramer.
Producer Lesli Klainberg. Readings from the works of Paul Monette by
Jonathan Fried. Narrated by Linda Hunt. Original Music by Jon Ehrlich.
Running time: 90 minutes
At the Laemmle Music Hall Theatre until May 28.
