Title
Review for Gunfight at the O.K. Corral (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
When long-brewing conflict between feuding clans in
Tombstone, Arizona finally reached its culmination on
October 24th 1881, resulting gun violence didn't last more
than few dozen seconds. Hardly anybody at that time could
have predicted that the incident, known as "Showdown at the
O.K. Corral", would gradually get epic proportions and
become crucial part of American folklore. Myth of O.K.
Corral was later perpetuated by Hollywood, whose filmmakers
made multitude of westerns covering those events, some of
them later being hailed as classics. One of such films is
GUNFIGHT AT THE O.K. CORRAL, popular western directed in
1957 by John Sturges.
The plot of this film deals less with the showdown itself
and more with the relationship between two of its most
famous participants. The first is Wyatt Earp (played by Burt
Lancaster), sheriff of Dodge City whose successes in
bringing law and order to the numerous wild towns of Old
West already made him a legend. The other is Dr. John `Doc'
Holiday (played by Kirk Douglas), former dentist who traded
his profession for gambling career and whose notorious
reputation of gunslinger caused many aspiring thugs to make
attempts on his life. Holiday proved too good for them, but
the tuberculosis is going to succeed in what numerous
gunslingers failed. Earp, being of high moral principle,
doesn't like Holiday's way of life, but he nevertheless
saves him from the lynch mob. Holiday later returns the
favour by helping Earp to keep the peace in Dodge City. Two
men gradually learn not only to tolerate or respect each
other, but also become very good friends. After a while Earp
decides to quit the law enforcement business for the sake of
the new, peaceful life with beautiful Laura Denbow (played
by Rhonda Fleming). However, before their marriage, news
from Tombstone, Arizona would make him reconsider. Whyatt's
brothers, who work as local lawmen, got in feud with
Clantons, local clan of thugs and cattle thieves, so Wyatt
goes to Tombstone in order to help them. Doc Holiday follows
him, but when they arrive to Tombstone, Earps are not happy
to see their brother in the company of such notorious
gunslinger.
Most films that covered events at the O.K. Corral took very
liberal approach to historical facts, sacrificing accuracy
for the sake of simplicity or additional spectacle. Script
for GUNFIGHT AT THE O.K. CORRAL, written by Leon Uris,
wasn't exception, but the emphasis was this time given more
to the characters than to the action itself. Result is
somewhat overlong film, with at least few scenes that would
better be left on the cutting floor (like quite unnecessary
episode with Laura Denbow). But slower rhythm is compensated
with top acting performances. The most memorable are, of
course, those by two leads. Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas
again make a terrific team. Lancaster, although he plays
character of Earp closer to American myth than the version
used in future, more revisionist, films, allows his
character to show some vulnerability and occasional slip
into the dark side. Douglas, on the other hand, plays his
character splendidly - his portrayal of boozing and
terminally ill gunslinger, although it lacks Douglas'
trademark charm, is quite sympathetic and the audience would
forgive Doc everything, even the hints of abuse in his
relationship with long-suffering girlfriend Kate Fisher,
splendidly played by Jo Van Fleet. Both Lancaster and
Douglas excel in mutual scenes, creating buddy buddy
chemistry that would become legendary in future years.
Supporting cast is also splendid, but among many names
stands young Dennis Hopper whose portrayal of young,
troubled yet hot-headed Bill Clanton would provide one of
the most powerful scenes not only in this film, but also in
1950s westerns.
Director John Sturges, whose speciality was action, had
little opportunity to show his talents in this dominantly
character-driven piece. But even such low volumes of actions
allowed him to stage few really interesting scenes,
including the spectacular, albeit non-historical, showdown
at the end of the film. The movie benefited a lot from the
talents of musical composer Dimitri Tiomkin, who actually
repeated the technique used in HIGH NOON. The title song,
which is sung by Frankie Laine, works as sort of Greek
chorus and helps keeping the mythical atmosphere of the
film. The overall result is professionally done and
interesting film, which, although being bellow standards of
a true masterpiece, deserves its rightful place among the
western classics.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
