Title
Review for Jour de fęte (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the eyes of casual filmophiles, French cinema is
associated with artistic and usually dead serious films. But
one of their most important and celebrated filmmakers,
Jacques Tati, actually earned his reputation by making only
few films, all belonging to the genre of comedy. The first
among them was HOLIDAY, shot in 1948. This film was
important in the history of French cinema, since it happened
to be the first one shot in colour. Unfortunately, due to
some technical and financial difficulties, the colour print
was never developed and Tati had to use back-up footage,
shot in black and white. In later years, Tati colourised
some segments using pencils and even added some new footage,
but HOLIDAY in its full, colourised glory was released in
1995, thirteen years after director's death.
HOLIDAY shares the setting and protagonist with Tati's
previous film, 1947 short L'?COLE DES FACTEURS. Franois
(played by Tati) is a postman who works in small, sleepy
provincial town of Saint-Severe-sur-Indre. Once a year, on
holiday, the town is visited by fair. Among the things
featured on the fair is a cinema. Franois watches a short
documentary that praises the modern equipment, dedication
and speed of U.S. postal service. Since all townspeople
begin to mockingly compare Franois' slow ways with the
efficiency of his American colleagues, he decides to change
his technique. Next day he devises many ingenious ways to
deliver mail as quickly as possible, sometimes with funny
results and unexpected consequences.
For some of the contemporary audiences, HOLIDAY, at least in
its beginning, might seem a little bit dated and some of the
gags are funny, but hardly hilarious. But once the viewer
gets tuned in he begins to truly enjoy this film. In a
relatively short time we meet simple, yet nice people and we
begin to truly appreciate their idyllic way (the village
portrayed sheltered Tati when he had run from being drafted
for slave labour in Germany during WW2). With time, the gags
are getting funnier and funnier, and the very loose plot,
Tati's favourite theme - impact on rapidly developed modern
technology on human beings - is properly established. The
film also could be viewed as an interesting comment on late
1940s France, especially the ambivalent relationship towards
Americans. On one hand, they are heralded as liberators and
providers of much needed Marshall Plan aid; on the other
hand, French national pride rebels against American cultural
imperialism. The film is also spiced with subplot dealing
with carnival worker Roger (played by Guy Decomble) who
constantly flirts with local girl Jeanette (played by Maine
Valle), despite having his wife (played by Santa Relli) by
his side. Such arrogant naughtiness was unimaginable in
Hollywood films of the same era. The pleasant, but not
overbearing music by Jean Yatove also contributes a lot to
the idyllic atmosphere.
Despite being somewhat aged, HOLIDAY after more than half a
century still remains a pleasant viewing experience, a film
that should be recommended to anyone tired of darkness so
omnipresent in the cinemas of today.
