Title
Review for Making of ...And God Spoke, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Two wannabee moviemakers in Hollywood, Clive (Michael Riley) and
Marvin (Stephen Rapport), are looking to break into big time.  Utterly
talentless but eager, they hit upon making a movie about the Bible
because of its built in audience.  Some four billion people have read the
Book and will be flocking to the theaters to see their opus.  Sure. The
good news is that they have deleted all the depressing parts.
     So what if there were actually twelve Apostles?  Clive and
Marvin's budget only allows for eight; who will know the difference?
Brando decides not to be in their film but Soupy Sales is available and
willing to play Moses.  Because the filmmakers need money they agree to
product placement so Moses is holding a six-pack in one hand and the
Tablets in the other.
     Everything that can go wrong does because Clive and Marvin have
not the faintest idea of what they are doing.  When they are about to
film Eve in the Garden of Eden, they discover the actress (Christie
Michelle) whom they have selected to play Eve has tattoos all over her
body.  Cain is Lou Ferrigno, the giant hulk.
     Obviously, the film is not for those who take the Bible
"religiously."  But if you have a sense of humor about Life and
Religion, you'll find God, Jesus, Mary, Noah, etc. portrayed in this
satire film.
     First-time filmmaker, Arthur Borman, who apparently has lots of
experience in how a film is born, produced, made and marketed, directed
this very funny takeoff on that very subject.
