Title
Review for Agantuk (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Sri Rajeev
AGANTUK (THE STRANGER or THE VISITOR), Bengali with English subtitles,
Satyajit Ray, 1991.  Shown at the San Francisco International Film
Festival (which was dedicated to Mr. Ray's memory) and to appear at
Seattle and other festivals.
     As Satyajit Ray's last film, AGANTUK would be a sentimental
favorite anyway with admirers of the Indian master's work.  However,
unlike much of Ray's somewhat uneven work in the last few years, this is
indeed a good film, able to stand on its own merits.  It is not a
masterpiece, but it is an exceedingly good film, except for being
perhaps a little preachy.
     The plot is rather simple: a wealthy Calcutta couple's life is
thrown into some turmoil by the unexpected appearance of a man who
claims to be the wife's long-lost uncle.  She has no recollection of the
uncle, who had left home when she was two; and there are few older
people who remember him.  The mysterious man, played by veteran Utpal
Dutt, engages in a game of cat-and-mouse with the couple; he appears
erudite and well-travelled--and claims to be an anthropologist who has
spent many years among tribal/native peoples in many parts of the
world--but is he really a clever imposter eyeing a very substantial
inheritance left to the uncle?
     Some of the plot similarities to THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE (the
French film about the return of a medieval soldier to his home village
where the locals think he's an fraud) are clear: how can the man prove
himself?  But I was also reminded strongly of Ray's own ARANYER DIN RAAT
(DAYS AND NIGHTS IN THE FOREST) both for the tribal motif and for the
verbal pyrotechnics and sense of menace; as well as Kurosawa's recent
work, especially RHAPSODY IN AUGUST and DREAMS, for its concern for the
environment and man's relation to nature.  Ray and Kurosawa were
apparently good friends and perhaps they influenced each other.
     AGANTUK fits in with a sequence of Ray films that is relatively
little-known.  In addition to his brilliant neo-realistic works on rural
and poor Bengali life, including the Apu trilogy and ending with the
1973 ASHANI SANKET (DISTANT THUNDER), he also made a number of films
about urban angst; including his (in my opinion) underrated "Calcutta
Trilogy" consisting of JANA ARANYA (URBAN JUNGLE), SEEMABADDHA (LIMITED
CORPORATION) and PRATIDWANDI (THE ADVERSARY).  These films trace the
rise, in the city that Ray loved, of a commercial middle class without
moral or ethical moorings.  It is likely that Ray, in his last years,
became cynical about the decline of Bengali culture; hence his
world-weary SHAKHA PROSHAKHA (BRANCHES OF THE TREE) (1990) and
GANASHATRU (ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE, adapted from Ibsen) (1989).
     Unlike these, AGANTUK is a light-hearted film, although it touches
upon heavy questions about what civilization is and what modern man can
learn from primitive cultures.  Ray seems to use techniques from his
best-selling detective fiction in Bengali to build up tension about the
identity and motivations of the enigmatic visitor.  Arrayed against his
bullying intellect are the somewhat bemused hosts, bound by tradition to
offer their hospitality.  There is an electrifying debate between Utpal
Dutt and a friend of the family, well played by angry young man
Dhritiman Chatterjee.  "Science" and "rationalism" and Mr. Chatterjee
come off somewhat the worse for wear against Mr. Dutt's "primitives"
and "superstition."  In the end, however, the audience is not
necessarily captivated by the stern and pedantic Mr. Dutt, who blames
his peripatetic life on wanderlust.
     Personally for me, there were some great moments in the film--the
scene where Mr. Dutt is first seen, on board a train that's pulling
into Howrah station in Calcutta--reminded me of how much Ray loved
trains, and how significant they were in the Apu trilogy.  Some of
indoor shots, where the camera seemed to have a mind of its own, gently
caressing priceless antiques, were interesting.  The music, scored by
Ray himself, and the simple but touching folk song, were very appealing.
Even the somewhat cliched dance by the Santhal tribals was not bad.  All
in all, AGANTUK is a fitting end to the career to one of the greatest
geniuses of the cinema.  In his humanistic tradition, Ray has created a
humorous, entertaining and insightful film.
--
Sri Rajeev, Marketing Manager, Display Products
MTV 15-46, Sun Microsystems, 2550 Garcia Ave, Mt. View, CA 94043
(415)-336-1101  rajeev@travancore.eng.sun.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AGANTUK (director: Satyajit Ray; cast: Depankar De (Sudhindra Bose),
Mamata Shankar (Anila Bose), Bikram Bannerjee (Satyaki Bose), Utpal Dutt
(Manomohan Mitra), Dhritiman Chatterjee (Prithwish Sen Gupta), Robi
Ghosh (Ranjan Rakshit), Ajit Bannerjee (Sital Sarkar), 1991-India)
Satyajit Ray's 28th and last film, he died in 1992, is one that he shot
in radiant color, and is as close as you can come to being a masterpiece
and not be one, it is much better than some of his recent films, which
seemed to show his old-fashioned humanistic ideas of what a film should
be like, to be in a decline with the modern theater goer's taste.This
film moved me a great deal, as I found empathy with his deep feelings
about the observations he has made regarding the affects of
civilization.
In his swan song, it is very much apparent that the great film director
has made this work very much autobiographical, speaking through the
hermit visitor of a niece he has not seen in 35-years, seeing her last
when she was only 2- years-old, as he returns to Calcutta, his place of
birth, as an old man who is wizened for having traveled the world and
for having lived among savages for most of his life.
The plot is rather plain. The great-uncle Mitra (Dutt), played with a
certain grain of boldness and great wit and a fierce sense of humor and
a proper restraint, writes in impeccable Bengali to his wealthy niece,
Anila (Mamata), that he will visit her for one week and realizes the
visit might come as a surprise to her, but wants to know if she can
accept him and offer him the hospitality of a traditional Indian family
visit. This causes concern for her husband Sudhindra (Depankar De), who
is a successful and well-educated executive, as they fear he might be an
imposter after their money, but yet they feel obligated to honor their
traditional roles in life. Only their 11-year-old son Satyaki (Bikram)
seems to be genuinely glad of the visit, and easily accepts him as his
uncle, intrigued by his knowledge and generosity of spirit.
When asked why he left his family and had no contact with them for all
these years, he animatedly tells them, it was wanderlust and the bisons
he saw painted on the caves by the savages before the age of
civilization, this encouraged him to become an anthropologist and not a
painter and live among the different tribal people of the world, he
feels that no painter could learn the art better than the savages have.
This makes Sudhindra more suspicious of him than before, as he thinks
that he is certainly scholarly and articulate and well-travelled, but he
might be this clever because he is really an impostor. So he devices
several ways to trap the uncle into telling the truth, one by having the
visitor show him his passport, which he readily does, and secondly, by
having his trial savvy lawyer friend, Prithwish (Dhritiman),
cross-examine him. The family has no other way of confirming in a hurry
if this is really their uncle.
The confrontation between Prithwish, who is a defender of rationalism
and science, but is primarily looking out for his friend's interest, in
finding out who this visitor really is, as he does his best to bring out
the uncle's beliefs in the virtues and superiority of the primitive
culture, agreeing with him only that religion sets up barriers between
people and causes more harm than it does good. But Prithwish is worn
down after an evening of sharp conversations and badly deflated that his
arguments don't hold up that well, and embarrasses the family by leaving
angrily and telling the uncle that he should either prove who he is or
leave. While the uncle only seems more anxious after this exhausting
talk to clear up some business he has to take care of and to get back to
his tribal people, where he feels more comfortable than with the
bourgeoisie.
Ray's choice of traditional music and primitive folk dance numbers,
especially when the uncle sees his niece dance with the women members of
the Santhal Tribe, is pulsating to behold and a reminder to us that we
shouldn't forget our roots.The opulence and warm-hearted nature of the
film overcame the lack of real suspense the film had and its
predictability. His light touch and simple human gestures with the
camera, poured out a delightfully intellectual array of food for
thought, allowing this film to be both visually entertaining and a
homage to a great director's creative life, questioning and stirring up
his audience to keep knowing more about themselves and the world they
live in, as he leaves us with this last eloquent film, one that has his
signature firmly on it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Å  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
