Title
Review for Last Boy Scout, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
snarler@maple.circa.ufl.edu (Drifter...)
     Oh, so maybe Bruce Willis messed up with HUDSON HAWK.  And maybe
action movies are getting passe or formulaic or whatever....
     The movie had plenty of action, though none of the intense, endless
type in DIE HARD.  A bit more keyed down.  There are certain scenes
that are totally impossible, yes.  But there were good one-liners,
fairly interesting (if stereotypical) characters, and definitely good
acting.
     One thing that impressed me was Bruce Willis's character's
daughter.  A totally atypical young daughter character played very well
by a young female actress that looks very familiar.  While her role is
pretty much passive, the conflicts between her and her father are
sharply defined and rather intense.  More so than between Bruce Willis's
character and his wife.
     Meanwhile, the buddy character, played by the young actor from IN
LIVING COLOR without the hair, is rather amusing but rather passive,
compared to Bruce Willis.  This may be a matter of writing rather than
acting, however.  It is certainly quite a leap from pure comedy to
violent-action-buddy-cop material.
     By far, my favorite character was the nasty young bad guy with the
short blonde hair and misfortune to fall into large flying machines.  He
reminds me significantly of an actor who used to play on the old TOO
CLOSE FOR COMFORT series that had Ted Knight as a father with two
daughters.  I do not know if it is the same actor, but he made an
appealing villain.
     There is no doubt that this movie would fall apart under close
scrutiny, with contradictions and holes and fairly simple plotting.  But
it has good production values and good acting, with nicely done action
scenes and a great kicker of an opening sequence.  I recommend the movie
for action fans who do not want to bother with any deep, meaningful
material or worrying about just *where* all those bullets come from....

Author
Mark Santora
     I saw a preview of this film last Saturday with a sell out crowd.  
Needless to say, the crowd was a little rowdy.  Anyway, the crowd will
not influence this review.
     Well, this film is the latest "buddy" film from writer Shane
Black (of LETHAL WEAPON fame).  Bruce Willis plays an ex-Secret Service
guy who now owns his own private investigators license.  Damon Wayans
plays an ex-football quarterback who was banned from the game for drug
use.   Basically, these two get teamed up when Bruce is put on a case to
watch an exotic dancer who just happens to be Daymon's girlfriend.  She
bites it and then it is off to find the bad guys.  The bad guys are
people who want to legalize sport gambling.  Hence Daymon gets something
to do than act stupid.
     Plot wise the film holds together like all other action films.  No
need to get really specific, but it works.  There is one problem.  The
direction, by Tony Scott is horrible.  Tony Scott's previous work,
including TOP GUN, REVENGE, BEVERLY HILLS COP II, and DAYS OF BLUNDER
(oh, that's THUNDER, isn't it?), all headed towards a dark filmic
style.  Well, here he goes overboard.  It just kills the film.  There
are parts that you want to scream at the screen for the idiot to put a
few lights on so we can see what is going on.  The direction seriously
impairs the film.
      Also, I will take *serious* issue with the opening credits.  I am
about to get technical on you.  The film is shot scope, a ratio of 2.35
to 1.  In other words, it uses the full screen.  However, the opening
credits are shot on a 1.33 to 1 ratio (that's the TV ration folks).  What
does all this mean?  It means that when they go to transfer this to
videotape it will just go along smoothly.  Now some will say that it is
parody off the Monday Night Football song as that is what type of song
Bill Meadly sings.  But they just seemed so cheap.  I felt cheated.
This did not put me in a good mood to start off this film.
     Now, let's not forget character--in a Tony Scott film?  Anyway,
Bruce's wife and kid hate him because he is such a sleaze.  This sets up
nicely for the end of the film reunion with family  giving it a second
try.  And the ending is so-o-o set up for a sequel.
      Michael Kamen did the score.  It reminded me a great deal of his
DIE HARD music.  Okay, there were some really nice parts, but hey, it's
an action flick.  No need for amazing musical treats like Lawrence of
Arabia.  If Michael Kamen decides to do another action flick, I hope he
decides to use some new instruments and refrains.
      Overall, the movie just makes it.  Hampered by the direction and
the somewhat predictable script, it is an okay action flick.  Bruce
Willis should really think about doing that third DIE HARD film, know
what I mean?  Damon Wayans should come out ahead of himself.  He does a
pretty good job with his shallow character.  But Tony Scott has got to
lay off the dark lensing.  It is just too much.  Take a date.  Have a
mindless evening.  Other people will.  Or save your money and see THE
ADDAMS FAMILY, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and STAR TREK VI.  
