Title
Review for What Happened Was... (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     I don't normally review films, leaving that to Mark.  However, our
initial plan for this festival was that we would not necessarily be
seeing films together and so I figured I would review the ones Mark
didn't.  As it turned out, we ended up going to all the same movies but
I was already prepared to write some reviews, so what the heck.  I
will, however, avoid repeating the same comments about the festival
that he makes (regarding ticket procedures, etc.).
     One thing we had to be careful of in deciding what films to (try
to) see was what language(s) the film was in.  Many of the non-
English-language films are sub-titled in French rather than English.
We prefer not to repeat my MALEVIL experience: I went to see MALEVIL at
a science fiction convention in the Netherlands.  Unfortunately, it was
in French.  Fortunately, it was sub-titled.  Unfortunately, it was
sub-titled in Dutch.  This time the only thing we had initially
selected that had no English was JEANNE LA PUCELLE, PARTS I AND II, and
those turned out to be sold out anyway.  (The Cinema Imperial, a
magnificent older, and larger, theater, had what they called
"Softitles," which is an electronic subtitling system similar to what
is used for super-titles at operas.  This makes it possible to show
films subtitled in both English and French, with the English on the
film itself and the French on the board, and that is what was done
with, for example, the Chinese STORY OF YUNNAN.)
     The first night of the festival there were only two films,
KABLOONAK and NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  The first, because it was the
official opening of the festival, did not accept the coupons sold at
ten for C$45; the second was sold out by the time decided to try to go.
In fact, before the festival even opened, about two dozen screenings
were sold out, mostly French-language or high-profile films.  (The one
sold-out film that didn't meet either of these criteria was MRS. PARKER
AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE--and that turned out to have been filmed in
Montreal.)  So we decided to spend our unexpectedly free
evening ... going to a movie!
JACK L. WARNER, THE LAST MOGUL, directed by Gregory Orr, USA, 1:44:
     I just know this will show up on television the week we get back-
-it is a made-for-TV film and that's usually how our luck runs.  But we
figured we might as well see a film about a film producer at a film
festival.  (Not too many agreed with us--while the theater for
PRISCILLA was packed, this had maybe three dozen people all together.)
Unfortunately, this is a rather run-of-the mill documentary.
     Gregory Orr is Jack Warner's grandson--well, actually, he's the
son of Warner's step-daughter (who by the way was the actress who
played the young Bulgarian woman in CASABLANCA), which makes his claim
to be Warner's grandson a bit debatable, and makes me wonder if the
truth isn't being stretched elsewhere as well.  (In fact, the
photographs shown while the narrator is talking about the Warners
emigrating to America include some of the Warners and many other which
are just general archival photographs, yet no distinction is made.)
     The film did have its interesting moments.  Neal Gabler talked
about the irony of Russian Jewish immigrants marginalized by American
society, founding the industry that would eventually come to define
American society.  It was also thought-provoking to see the contrast
between Warner Brothers Studios's actions during the 1930s, when they
shut down operations in any country occupied by the Nazis, and in the
1950s, when they completely caved in to pressure from HUAC.  (They had
made MISSION TO MOSCOW during he war at the express request of
President Roosevelt, who wanted a film favorable to our then-allies and
came under suspicion in the McCarthy era because of it.)
     It seemed to me that Orr spent too much time on HIS story, even
including a movie he made as a child, instead of concentrating on his
subject.  This will probably do well on television as a nostalgia
piece, but doesn't have any spark beyond that.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
WHAT HAPPENED WAS..., directed by Tom Noonan, USA, 1:30:
     Tom Noonan wrote, directed, and co-starred in this two-person,
one-set film.  It cost $300,000 and was shot in just eleven days (proof
that the spirit of Roger Corman is alive in the land).  It then went on
to win the Grand Jury AND screen-writing prizes at the Sundance Film
Festival.
     Noonan and Karen Sillas play two co-workers at a law firm.  What
they discover when Sillas invites Noonan over for dinner one evening
forms the basis of the film.
     Noonan is not afraid to let the characters remain silent when that
is called for, nor does he insist on obvious "twists" or pat
resolutions.  The title refers to the story within the story, the
children's story Sillas's character is writing, and how you interpret
the film may be based on how you interpret this story.  Though a
dialogue, this film is reminiscent of some of Alan Bennett's monologue
plays (more so than to MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, which might seem the
obvious comparison), and is more likely to appeal to fans of theatrical
plays than to the average movie-goer.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
WOODSTOCK, directed by Michael Wadleigh, USA, 4:00:
     This was being shown on a giant outdoor screen in the Place des
Arts.  Since we got there late, we ended up sitting a block away with
our view partially blocked by a tree, and we could still feel our ribs
vibrate from the sound.  We stayed for five songs (including Joan Baez
singing "Joe Hill"), but even twenty-five years ago, there was a lot of
this music that I didn't like and I haven't much mellowed toward it
since then.  I can't really give any rating based on this abbreviated
viewing.  However, it's interesting to note some of the changes in the
director's cut.  For example, the original cut had no footage of Janis
Joplin.  Now director Wadleigh says Joplin is possibly the best blues
singer in the last thirty years and has added footage of her to the new
version.
MEN LIE, directed by John Andrew Gallagher, USA, 1:27:
     There didn't seem to be much point to this film.  Jill is going
out with Scott and believes he is faithful to her.  He isn't.  She
finds out.  That's about it.
     Of course, that wouldn't fill the 87 minutes this film takes, so
screenwriter/director Gallagher fills in the time with what is fast
becoming a cliche--a bunch of people giving their comments and opinions
to the camera.  (Is it Spike Lee or Woody Allen who started this trend?
And speaking of similarities to Woody Allen films, almost everyone is
this film is of European descent too--I think there was one black
"comment character.")
     There is actually a positively portrayed male character, and I
thought many of the female characters were negatively portrayed, so I
wouldn't claim this as completely one-sided as the title might lead you
to believe, but it was certainly a pessimistic portrayal of
relationships, and not really worth the time.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
KILLER, directed by Mark Malone, USA, 1:33:
     This film with its cast of five relies on writing and acting
rather than on special effects or action sequences for its appeal
(although it does have a couple of steamy sex scenes).  Anthony
LaPaglia plays a hitman whose assignment is to kill a woman (played by
Mimi Rogers) who seems strangely accepting of the fact.  Complicating
the job is LaPaglia's assistant, who bungled his last job and is
looking for a way to redeem himself.
     This is, as I indicated, more a character study than anything
else, and the actors do a convincing job of portraying their
characters.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     And of course, even though we did see nineteen films in a week,
there were several more that sounded interesting that we didn't get to
(several of which played only during the second week after we were
gone).  These included:
KABLOONAK, directed by Claude Massot, Canada/France, 1:45:
     This was the official opening film of the film festival and tells
the story of Nanook, who in 1922 was the "star" of Robert Flaherty's
NANOOK OF THE NORTH.  Later when people went back to see him again,
they discovered he had died the following winter during a seal hunt.
(Today, of course, they would have signed him to a multi-picture deal
and flown him all over the world for press conferences.)
PRINCESS CARABOO, directed by Michael Austin, USA, 1:37:
     A mysterious young woman appears in an English village in 1817,
and the villagers decide she is a Javanese princess.  We went to a
press conference with Austin (who also authored the script) at which
some of the questioners gave away a fair amount of the film, leading
one of the film's promoters to ask the press not to reveal too much in
their articles or reviews.  So I won't, except to say this is based on
a true story written up in ENGLISH ECCENTRICS, stars Phoebe Cates and
Kevin Kline, and cost under $10 million.
SEX, DRUGS, AND DEMOCRACY, directed by Jonathan Blank, USA, 1:27:
     This documentary look at how the Netherlands treats sex and drugs
in terms of laws and attitudes.  Blank is quoted in the daily magazine
distributed at the festival as saying that it was the Commissioner of
Police in Amsterdam who explained to him the provisions made for the
handicapped in the city's brothels.  "The Dutch were all really proud
of them," Blank said.  Apparently marijuana is illegal (to make the
Americans happy), but no one pays any attention to the law, and
abortions are illegal but the government pays for them.  Blank finds
the attitudes of many Americans very strange.  For example, the anti-
pornography lobbyists have claim pornography affects the viewer, yet
they have probably seen more pornography than anyone else and claim to
be unaffected.
     JEANNE LA PUCELLE I (LES BATAILLES) and JEANNE LA PUCELLE II (LES
PRISONS), directed by Jacques Rivette, France, 2:40 and 2:56:
     Even if these hadn't been sold out before we had a chance to get
tickets, the fact that they were in French and un-subtitled would have
made us give these a miss here, but a six-hour epic about Joan of Arc
is something in which I would definitely be interested if it were
subtitled in English (or even dubbed, though dubbing a six-hour movie
is probably prohibitively expensive).  The two parts will probably make
the rounds separately in most areas, since I suspect they are each
self-contained stories.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Karen Sillas, Tom Noonan.
Screenplay/Director:  Tom Noonan.
     Don't be fooled by the marketing campaign into believing that WHAT
HAPPENED WAS... is a light-hearted, quirky romantic romp about a
date-from-hell.  It most decidedly is not.  It is a dark, disturbing
and almost painfully honest character study which will have many
viewers shifting uncomfortably in their chairs.  The sensational
performances of Karen Sillas and Tom Noonan should have added up to a
sensational film, but they don't quite.  In adapting his two person
stage play, Noonan manages both to under-direct and to over-direct,
sacrificing much of the story's potential entertainment value for a
more serious tone which simply doesn't ring quite as true.
     WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is the story of an evening shared by two
co-workers in a New York law firm who at first glance appear to have
little in common.  Jackie (Sillas) is a plain-spoken "executive
assistant" from a working class background; Michael (Noonan) is a
Harvard-educated paralegal with a dry and caustic sense of humor.
Jackie has invited Michael to dinner at her apartment, and the two
proceed to engage in the typical first date small talk.  However, each
begins to discover that there is more to the other than meets the eye,
and as the evening progresses there come a series of revelations which
make this first date anything but casual.
     The first half of WHAT HAPPENED WAS..., which establishes the
characters through the mundane, is by far its most effective.  We meet
Jackie as she frantically prepares both herself and her apartment for
her guest, and her anxiety continues until several glasses of wine
loosen her up.  Every note in Sillas' performance is dead on:  her
piecemeal serving of dinner, realizing halfway through that she has
forgotten the salad; her oft-repeated question to Michael of "That's a
joke, right?" as she fears--justifiably--that he is having fun at
her expense; her over-eager mantra of "cool" in response to his
achievements.  It's a beautiful and sensitive performance, and Jackie's
genuineness provides a perfect counterpoint to Michael's intellectual
reserve, as he tries to maintain the upper hand through sarcasm without
even knowing it.  It soon becomes clear that Jackie is far more
perceptive than Michael, and as the power dynamic shifts, Michael
crumbles.  The development of this shift through the dinner is
fascinating, if almost too understated.
     However, Noonan is not content to deliver a sort of MY DINNER DATE
WITH ANDRE, and it is when the script takes an abrupt left turn into
psychodrama that the film falters.  It begins with Jackie reading to
Michael a children's story she has written, a grim fairy tale about
incest and matricide, with Michael becoming progressively more
distraught by the tale.  Noonan simply takes the scene too far;
children's voices whisper in the background, the camera shoots through
the windows of a dollhouse, and Sillas is lit with flickering candles
like a voodoo priestess.  The self-conscious arsty-ness of Noonan's
direction takes a serious scene and makes it almost a self-parody.
Michael's big breakdown is also played far too broadly.  There is a
falseness to his confession, and WHAT HAPPENED WAS... eventually begins
too feel extremely scripted, losing the pinpoint honesty which had been
its strength.
     Noonan clearly wanted to tell a story of broken people finding
each other, of barriers being torn down, and of the secrets that keep
people isolated and lonely.  The problem with WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is
that it is much more interesting when its observations about human
interaction are inspiring nervous laughter than when they are supposed
to be inspiring serious contemplation.  Stories based on big emotional
confrontations between characters are tricky to transfer from the stage
to the screen.  WHAT HAPPENED WAS...  Noonan only got it half right.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I had never been to a film festival before and I was curious what
made them click.  Is it just a lot of films being shown various
places?  Are there any central activities?  How does it work?
     Well, first some large numbers.  People who attend the full
festival get their choice of 250 films to see.  There are roughly
300,000 attendees.  Four movie theaters participate but because two are
large multiplexes there are as many as eleven different films showing
at the same time and perhaps a twelfth if you include the free
screenings of films in the park.  Filmmakers from all over the world
provide films and on one screen you may have a real mixed bag of films
showing in one day.  A typical theater will show in one day:
     DINNER'S ON THE TABLE (Canadian)
     LES AMOUREUX (French)
     BANDIT QUEEN (Indian)
     FAUT PAS RIRE DU BONHEUR (French)
     I LOVE YOU ROSA (Turkish)
     NOT ANGELS BUT ANGELS (Czech)
     SHE LIVES TO RIDE (US made-for-TV)
     Uh, monolinguals like myself have to be a little careful.  I
wanted to see a film about Joan of Arc and then Evelyn noticed it was
just in French.  Of course they seem geared to boorish US visitors:
their description of the film explained who Joan of Arc was.  (It turns
out education seems to be failing Canadians just like it is failing US
people.  If anything, you see more people listing prices like .99 cents
here than you see in the US.
     There are two handbooks of the festival.  There is a free handout
with schedules at the various theaters and an index so that you can
find when a given film is playing.  It also has a page or two of
descriptions of the film, but not nearly enough.  For C$16 you get a
catalog of films 3/4-inch thick and heavier than you might want to
carry around.  It has a page on each of the feature films.  The printed
materials are poorly designed.  If you look through the catalog and a
film looks interesting, but you are not sure it will be in English you
have to go to the handout and look up in the index to see when the film
is playing.  But that is only a time and date.  You then have eleven
different listings to search to find which theater is showing the film
you want.  (Evelyn points out that there the index does tell you in an
encoded form which theater has the film, but I am just slowly catching
on.)  Then you look at that listing to find the language.  Some are
English, some are French with English subtitles.  You might have picked
a film that is in Dutch with French subtitles.  It is not quite that
bad because you can look at the title of the film and usually can guess
what language the film will be in and usually the non-English films
will have English subtitles.  But the listings could be a lot more
convenient to use.
     Oh, and you are currently reading not just the best description of
the rules of how the fest works--well, that goes without saying--you
are reading the only one.  We have not found in French or in English
any explanation of how things work at the festival.  We missed the
first night's film because we did not know about exchanging tickets in
advance, but that is getting a bit ahead of myself.
     Tickets for the showings (other than three or four free films
shown out of doors--mostly concert films like the director's cut of
WOODSTOCK) are inexpensive compared to evening tickets at home.  They
are C$6.50 individually or C$45 for a book of ten.  (In US currency
$5.08 and $35.16 respectively.)  You basically have to pick up tickets
in advance or risk the film selling out.  Evelyn assumed that only if
you pay the C$6.50 you can reserve a place at the film.  That made all
the difference.  She thought that if they "sold out" all their seats
with individual tickets, nobody could get in using tickets from the
ticket books.  By this misunderstanding that is what happened Thursday
night, the first night of the festival.  They had two featured films,
KABLOONAK and NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  We did not know we could get
advanced tickets with the book so both were sold out.  Instead we went
to another film, one not showing as part of the festival, but playing
at a non-participating theater to the same audience.  It is:
     This is a 1992 Swedish documentary (in German--perhaps for German
television?) by Peter Cohen examining Hitler's philosophy and National
Socialism as an aesthetic movement and an attempt to impose by force a
single aesthetic sensibility on the world.  It was a fanatical effort
by any Procrustian means necessary to make the world fit his personal
idea of what is beauty.  Hitler's aesthetic was, it is suggested, built
on three pillars: the town where he was born, Wagner, and Classical
art.
     Cohen sees the entire political career of Hitler from this point
of view.  Hitler was a failed painter and architect who saw the
collapse of the world coming led by degenerate art and tolerance of
what he personally considered ugly.  His inspiration was Rienzi, a
knight in a Wagnerian opera who wanted to return to the grandeur of
Mediterranean Classical cultures but was betrayed.  According to Hitler
the Classical age was entirely beautiful, but that the protection and
preservation of so-called "genetic defectives" like the mentally and
physically handicapped as well as Jews was a threat to what he saw as
an ever-diminishing proportion of the population who were people of
pure and untainted blood.  He considered himself "a political Robert
Koch" ferreting out the impure genetic microbes in society and
restoring society to health.  He brought 45% of German physicians into
the Nazi party and then had them institute programs of what he called
"euthanasia" to murder those who had impure blood.
     Cohen's Hitler did not want art that pointed to social ills in his
new world.  The only acceptable art would portray man as noble and
living in harmony with an idealized nature.  He himself designed the
uniforms, insignia, and standards of his followers.  Part of his plan
was to make over Berlin as a fantastic futuristic city based on
Classical artistic principles decorated with huge statues, thirty feet
tall or higher.  Part of the design was that even the ruins should
outdo Roman and Greek ruins in magnificence.  Cohen shows us all this
with remarkable new documentary footage and places more familiar
footage in a new context.
     At first it seems a trivialization of Nazism to consider it an
aesthetic movement--an attempt to beautify the world.  It also at first
glance seems to be literally adding insult to injury for Hitler's
victims.  This certainly is not the point of view of the of
ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM and Cohen's interpretation only serves to make
Hitler seem more perverted.  He fashions himself a heroic exterminator
of pests without giving any thought to the equalizing of humans to
lice, rats, and insects in his attempts to get to his idealized vision
of a squeaky clean world.  This film serves as an admonition to those
who would regulate art forms like rock and rap the extremes to which it
is possible to go and how destructive the results can be when carried
to fascist extremes.  I am not accusing those who would limit and
censor lyrics of going to the extremes of a Hitler, but there may be
similarities in the impulses and the film is a warning against trying
too hard to re-form the world to fit some idealized view of how things
should be.
     This film is a major reinterpretation of history, but it is not
clear that any really useful conclusions can be drawn from it.  Does it
make a difference whether people are murdered from a motive of hatred
or aesthetics?  In fact, might it not even be the same thing?  While
the value of ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM's conclusions might be questioned, it
is a totally engrossing documentary which has a lot of very striking
archival footage.  I rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     At this writing it is the second day of the festival.   Montreal
is a city that has, if anything, more panhandlers than Manhattan.  They
are a much narrower ethnic mix, but Rue Ste. Catherine seems to draw
them.  Ste. Catherine is the center of the festival.  All the theaters
are on Ste. Catherine or are a short distance off of it on a side
street.
     Waiting in line for our second film we talked to a gentleman from
the Bronx who told us what was wrong with the festival.  We told him
what films had looked interesting and he told us what bad taste in
films we had.  Ah, New Yorkers!  Well, he has to get in line if he
wants to insult my taste.  Come to think of it, he did.
     On our way in we got had news and good news.  The bad news was
that they did not just take coupons from the book for entrance, we had
to go back and pick up tickets for the specific film.  The good news
was that Evelyn was wrong and we could get advance tickets with our
book coupons.  We had erroneously bestowed upon ourselves the status of
second-class citizens because we had bought tickets in bulk.  Well, no
problem.  We probably saw a better film--although a really bad print--
as a result.
     THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT
     This is a film that has gotten a lot of favorable critical comment
and that is in large part because it is a nice pleasant enjoyable film
that takes no chances beyond those obvious in the premise.  The story
is of three drag queens making a journey across the Australian desert
from Sydney to Alice Springs to make a performance engagement.  Knowing
that, about two-thirds of the script more or less writes itself on
auto-pilot.  Of course they run into bigots along the way and have a
violent scene with them.  Of course their gaudy show clothing looks
really strange on the backdrop of the desert.  Of course there are
conflicts among the three and some deep realizations along the way.  Of
course aborigines, children, and other people pure of heart accept them
without a second thought and it is mostly their parents and boozy men
in bars who have problems accepting them.  Of course every love song
will have a second interpretation when sung by this crowd.  (It is not
unlike the game of adding the phrase "in bed" to fortune cookie
fortunes.) This film is about as daring as wearing white socks with
black shoes and is certainly in no worse taste.  That aside, many of
the cliches it uses are cliches because they are entertaining and this
film that wants so much to be shocking is nothing more than light,
pleasant entertainment.
     Felicia, Mitzi, and Bernadette, born respectively Adam, Anthony,
and Ralph, played respectively by Guy Pearce, Hugo Weaving, and Terence
Stamp, dress in gaudy women's show clothing and mouth the lyrics of
popular songs.  Hey, it's a living.  The first two are drag queens
while Bernadette is a transsexual.  They have to get to Alice Springs
for an engagement so Felicia buys an old tour bus and christens it
"Priscilla, Queen of the Desert."  Tensions are constantly present as
they try to outdo each other in being catty to each other.  But the
first real strain on their relationship comes when Mitzi admits to
having a wife in Alice Springs.  Not too unpredictably the bus breaks
down and getting going again is a minor adventure in itself.
     Director Stephen Elliott has very little insightful to tell us
about drag queens.  I would like to assume that these people are
somewhat deeper than this film's slightly insulting behavior.  One, for
example, has as her great ambition to climb to the top of King's Canyon
in drag.  Elliott can tell his audience that this is an innocent enough
ambition but isn't he being insulting by making his character so
superficial?  Much has been made of the departure this film is for
Terence Stamp.  Until now he has played mostly straight-laced anal-
retentives.  Bernadette is not straight-laced but if anything she is
even more anal-retentive than Stamp's usual characters.
     This film is really little more daring than having Whoopi Goldberg
dress as a nun.  Unless you reject the well-labeled premise from the
start, you will probably find this a surprisingly wholesome feel-good
sort of film, a little strong on manipulation and weak on credibility
in spots, but rarely failing to entertain.  I found it to be about a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
     After the film we queued up to get the tickets for upcoming
showings.  We got near the door to enter the theater when an employee
of the theater came to fold the line with posts and velvet ropes.  One
placed a post to my left about two feet from the door and attached a
rope to it going back and another hooked to the doors to its left.
"That's not right," I thought.  The line shouldn't have a bend here.
This is where the line should end.  A second employee came out, saw the
same thing we did and tried to explain to the first why what he was
doing would not work.  The first employee went off to take down the
first rope.  The wiser rolled his eyes in an expression that
transcended the language barrier.  Eventually we got in and got tickets
for everything else we wanted to see.  Though it did not at first
appear so, Luck of Leeper was positive for once.  The weather could be
nicer, I suppose.  But ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM seemed to have
reverberations in PRISCILLA and also in our next film.
     There are many accusation made these days about the Jewish people.
It is claimed that they controlled the State Department... totally
untrue.  It is claimed they control banking and finance... also an
invention.  It is claimed they control the film industry.  Well, that
one really was true at one time.  They didn't just control it, they
WERE the film industry.  Jews invented it, often risking all they had
on it.  The major studios were all founded by Jews before there was a
film industry.  But unique among the major studios was Warner Brothers.
It was actually owned by a family.  They made running a studio a family
business.
     JACK L. WARNER is a television documentary made for one of the
Turner stations, written and directed by Gregory Orr, the son of a
step-daughter of Warner.  It covers much the same territory as the book
HOLLYWOOD BE THY NAME by Cass Sperling, another grandchild of Warner.
Orr's documentary style is workman-like, but the film benefits from
particularly interesting subject matter.  Warner's career spans the
film industry from the time of Edison's Kinetiscopes up through the
film 1776.
     The brothers were four of the five sons of a Polish shoemaker who
came to America fleeing the oppression of Cossacks.  The fledgling
cinema industry was the last of several businesses the boys tried,
first projecting, then exhibiting, then distributing, and finally
making films.  They might have remained just a minor studio that would
have quickly died but for their gamble on sound which made them into a
major studio.  The documentary covers their carving out a niche of
films appealing to the common people without the high gloss of an MGM.
Crime and gangster films were their mainstay.
     But while Jack was trying to appeal to the common viewer, his
second wife was building his house into a palace and price was no
object.  Orr says the studio made the first anti-Nazi feature film,
CONFESSIONS OF A NAZI SPY.  At the request of FDR they also made the
pro-Russian MISSION TO MOSCOW.  It was a favor they would come to
regret.  The film covers the war period, the decline in the post-war
era, Jack's cooperation with HUAC, and the power struggles at the
studio with their roots in the earliest family days.
     The documentary gets off to a slow start with Orr telling his
childhood reminiscences of the Warner mansion and showing an amateur
film he made as a boy.  That is the worst touch of the film and it is
over quickly enough.  But Orr continues to put himself too much into
the film.  There is also a disorienting effect from Orr taking events
in semi-chronological order, but straying once in a while.  We hear
CASABLANCA discussed before we are told about the studio's response to
the US getting involved in the war.
     Orr uses interviews of people famous and not so famous who knew
Jack Warner.  But the greatest insights come from Neal Gabler who seems
to put Warner into a context better than Orr can.  Also, of course,
there is a wealth of documentary footage, old home movies, and of
course clips from the films made.
     Gabler's insights include observations that the United States
seems to have gotten its image of itself from movies created by
outsiders, recent immigrants mostly.  Warner in particular made film
about characters a lot like himself: short, feisty underdogs, often
recently emigrated from Europe.  That description fits Cagney,
Robinson, Raft, and Muni.  Gabler cites the conflicts between Harry
Warner with his Old World ways and Jack Warner who was more a product
of the Americas.  This conflict is reflected in the rabbi and his son
in THE JAZZ SINGER.
     JACK L. WARNER, THE LAST MOGUL is nothing great, but how wrong can
it go in covering so much of the history of the American film industry
through one of its most pivotal figures?  It gets a tremendous boost
from the cinematic interest value.  My rating would be a low +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
     Montreal is a very good restaurant town.  There is a really good
ethnic mix of restaurants.  Dinners out so far have been "Smoked meat
Pizzaghetti."  For a Yankee like myself that name had the greatest
number of mysteries to unravel.  That turns out to be more segregated
than the title implies.  "Pizzaghetti" is just a small pizza with a
side of spaghetti.  For local food, a great favorite seems to be the
mysteriously named "smoked meat."  I am not used to ordering anything
with a name so vague.  (Even "hot dog" is specific if not accurate.)
Smoked meat turns out to be what we would call "corned beef."  At least
I hope so.  I think there was a horror film once called MOTEL HELL in
which food was similarly just called "meat" without being more
specific.  The meat turned out to be what the pirates used to call
"long pork" or "long John."  How many readers of TREASURE ISLAND
recognize the delicious irony of having a ship's cook named Long John
Silver?  But that is one heck of a digression.  Our second night was
had Arab fast food and our third night we had a nice meal of Hungarian
food.
     Our third day we again got to the theater early.  This time we met
while waiting a very kindred spirit.  He is into exotic cuisine,
philosophy, know mathematics, and of course he likes cinema.  Herb
Louis was his name (or perhaps Lewis) and he is the former head of a
philosophy department at a Canadian university.  He made some
restaurant recommendations that we will probably use.  I made a
reference to Evariste Galois and he knew a fair amount about him.
     The town is Amerigua, perhaps in Paraguay.  Maybe eighteen years
ago when it was little more than a few dirt farms, Colonel Banderas
murdered a discontented activist farmer in front of the eyes of the
farmer's family under the pretext that the farmer was a Communist.
Everisto, the farmer's young son, responded by attacking the Colonel,
then fleeing the country.  There have been many changes since then.
Now the country, while every bit as corrupt, pays lip service to the
ideals of democracy.  Still, the entire village lives in the shadow of
Colonel Banderas, now an important national figure.  Rather than justa
few farms Amerigua looks like a town.  It has a town hall; it has a
radio station.
     This is a big day in Amerigua.  There will be a big beauty pageant
in the evening where the village will choose the most beautiful woman
in the village.  Colonel Banderas has decided in the name of democracy
that just the right woman should win and will tell the judges whom they
must choose, once he finally makes up his mind if it should be his
daughter, his son's fiance, or his mistress.  Important people will be
coming to Amerigua, some on the morning train, and a Japanese diplomat
will be coming to town to be one of the judges.  The concert will be
sponsored by several international companies who trade in this country.
     But for a short prologue, the entire film takes place in one day
as we get to meet the village.  First we meet Innocencio, a nerdish
young radio reporter never seen without huge large earphones and a huge
microphone.  We see the preparations for the big day, and petty
political squabbles over what should be the color of the welcoming
carpet.  The various contestants waking up for the big day.  Front-
runner for the competition is Maria (who looks very much like Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio) engaged to the Colonel's son and due to be
married the same day as she vies for the title of Miss Amerigua.
Carmen, the Colonel's daughter is willful and spoiled.  Rosa,
Everisto's sister who does not get along with her mother, is now the
Colonel's mistress willing to do all she needs to in order to get out
of Amerigua.  Then there is Reencarnacion, the gay hairdresser with a
penchant for Tarot and the supernatural.
     There is something about a beauty pageant that reveals greed,
hypocrisy, superficiality, and vanity.  Something about women vying to
be chosen as the most beautiful just seems a natural target for satire.
Much of this film is reminiscent of Michael Ritchie's underrated SMILE.
But this film mixes into the cocktail heavy doses of politics and even
some fantasy.  This film is written in the style of magical realism in
which minor fantasy elements get mixed into the plot.  Minor touches
include a harp that refuses to be played and a bust that makes comments
on what it sees.
     Luis Vera's MISS AMERIGUA is a good satiric comedy, at times quite
funny, that deserves release in the US.  It needs a better job of
English subtitling, but with that it could do very nicely on the art
house circuit in the US.  I would rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     The Desjardins Center is a shopping mall that also is a sort of
center of the film festival's activities.  An open area in the center
is given over to displays of film posters of films in the festival,
film art, and press conferences.  The film art look as lot like the
media art one sees in the art shows of science fiction conventions.  We
saw a conference with Michael Austin and Mark Abraham talking about
their film PRINCESS CARABOO.  The area was really full, but that was
because the second press conference scheduled was some American
comedian and actor named Steve Martin.  Uh, lest you be confused I
hasten to point out that is the actor's name and it has nothing to do
with the character Steve Martin, who was played by Raymond Burr in the
film classic GODZILLA, KING OF THE MONSTERS.  Apparently this comedian
picked the same name for recognition value.  The story for PRINCESS
CARABOO is apparently true, though some of the press questioned if
things could have happened like shown in the early 19th century.
     The next film is one that I do not expect to be of quite so higha
quality as the ones I have seen to this point.  I have a special
interest in fantasy films so I am curious to see anything new in that
field.  The catalog said a some intriguing things about TOM THUMB, but
how good can it be on that subject?
     The film BRAINSTORM had as one of the details of its plot that
there existed a tape such that if the person merely saw the tape it
could result in permanent psychosis.  Until I saw THE SECRET ADVENTURES
OF TOM THUMB I doubted that such a thing could exist.  This is a very
grim and dark fairy tale reminiscent of ERASERHEAD done with the
animation of NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.  The film is mostly done in
model animation with some pixilated live-action and though the film is
only 61 minutes, it has the feel of a nightmare that goes on a lot
longer.
     The story takes place in a grimy fly-ridden future.  A mistake in
an artificial insemination factory leaves fly organs in a bottle of
sperm.  The result is that a laborer and his wife give birth to child
only six inches high.  They name him Tom.  Their joy is only short-
lived as two faceless Kafka-esque government agents break into the
laborers' flat and steal the child, taking him to a scientific lab
where sadistic experiments are performed on him.  Tom escapes down a
waste drain with the help of some bizarre skeleton creature he
befriends at the lab.  In the outside world he finds a race of small
people almost his scale.  They wage constant war against the humans--or
"giants" as they call them--who, oblivious to their existence, come
tramping through their neighborhoods causing terrible destruction.
     This film is mostly the creation of Dave Borthwick who directed,
wrote, and edited the film.  Together with Frank Passingham he also
animated the film and did the photography with animation techniques
very reminiscent of Czech films.  Here he creates a bleak and grimy
world of huge fascistic government agencies, troglodyte wage-slave
laborer citizens, and a secret society of tiny people.  His little
people live in constant terror of the oblivious humans.  In short, this
is a very good job of creating a very good film that is darn
discomforting to watch and that can be recommended to only a razor-
narrow audience.  THE SECRET ADVENTURES was my kind of film and I could
only barely stand the images I was seeing.  See this one if you dare
but don't bring your mother or your kids.  While I say that, I cannot
imagine where this film will find a distribution even in video stores.
It is too short to play as a feature film, too downbeat to show to
children, and too animated to get an adult audience.  This is a
challenging film but not totally without its rewards.  I rate it a high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     To fill out the time with a somewhat lighter film from the same
producers, Richard Hutchinson and his Bolexbrothers Ltd. have included
the nine-minute piece, "The Biz," which uses live-action people with
animated masks covering their faces.  This animated film is about a
cocktail party to honor Ed, whose new film was just screened to rave
reviews.  We see that various people who talk to Ed at the party.  The
masks help to show us what Ed is thinking and help to characterize the
other guests.  It also seems made for the BBC and would be a good film
to have included in one of Expanded Entertainment's International
Tournees of Animation.
     That was better than I expected it to be.  I suppose the fact that
the films are pre-screened and have to be selected will mean that it is
more likely that the films will be good.  Certainly I am averaging
higher ratings for films that I see here than I would for films I see
at home.  I have yet to see a film I have not liked.  Of course I have
to break that streak tonight since I will be going to a film I gave up
on after fifteen minutes the last time I tried it.  I will be going to
the free showing of WOODSTOCK.  Concert films are definitely not my
thing.  Certainly rock concerts film are not.  But before that I will
be seeing one of the most highly-recommended films showing here this
year.
     This is a film that already has rally stripes.  Tom Noonan wrote,
directed and starred in this film which he made for only $300,000 and
took only eleven days to shoot it.  They finished editing the film just
hours short of the deadline for entering it in the Sundance Film
Festival.  But the effort to get the film done in time was repaid.  At
Sundance it won the Waldo Salt screenwriting award and Grand Jury
prize.  Samuel Goldwyn snapped it up for an immediate profit.  Noonan's
face may be familiar to filmgoers for other films in which he has
acted.  He has played psychopathic killers in films like MANHUNTER (the
earlier of the two "Hannibal Lector films") and THE LAST ACTION HERO.
It is good to see him in a more normal role.
     WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is basically a one-act play for two people
produced as a film.  But for a few scenes at the beginning, the film is
all one scene taking place as it happens in front of the camera.  This,
however, is not to imply the film was made in a single take but it does
give the film a certain immediacy.  A woman has invited a co-worker to
her Manhattan apartment for dinner.  Both work in a legal office,
Jackie as a secretary, Michael as a paralegal.  She has been impressed
by his sense of humor and is intrigued by his apparent working on some
secret project of his own.  She has invited him to a candlelight dinner
at her apartment.  The evening begins very awkwardly.  Each has a
talent for choosing just the wrong thing to say to the other.  The date
appears not to be working out at all.  But on and off the wine seems to
be loosening each other up.  They begin trading confidences and
dropping defenses.  Eventually each will know more about the other than
either of them really want.
     Tom Noonan's Michael is controlled and systematic.  Karen Sillas's
Jackie lives with emotional tides that Michael has been able to
suppress in himself.  He is mechanical and she is disturbed.  Noonan's
script gives hints as to how each has gotten that way, but in the end
much is left to conjecture.  Both performances have impressive
authenticity.  My one complaint would be that film is not really the
proper medium for this script.  More appropriate would be the live
stage.  Noonan's direction intentionally makes little use of the
advantages that cinema has over the live stage while it certainly could
benefit from the additional intensity and immediacy that live
performances would have given it.  Making the film more cinematic would
probably have further sacrificed the immediacy.  Noonan at least does
not repeat Hitchcock's error in ROPE of trying to create immediacy by
simulating a single take.  In ROPE Hitchcock apparently realized the
technique became a distraction and he did not repeat his error in DIAL
M FOR MURDER.  Occasionally Noonan misjudges the pacing of his
material, but his direction was usually on-target.
     In spite of the critical acclaim this film is getting, it is not
nearly as original as the rumor mill would have it.  It was reminiscent
of other dramatic works and very similar to a play produced on PBS in
the 60s called, if memory serves, "Birdbath."  While falling short of
my expectations for the film, I would still give it a respectable high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  You won't see much else like it in the
theaters soon.
     This is where a lot of people are going to discover they do not
agree with my taste, if they haven't already.
     Worm's-eye-view editorial: Traditional musical instruments do not
put out a sound that can be heard very great distances.  This is why
electrical amplification was invented.  It was intended to reflect with
fidelity the sound that the musical instruments were making.  They did
that within their designed range of amplification.  Go outside that
range and the sound would be distorted.  Often what you would get would
be a loud howl much like the howls of a person in pain.  Music is
supposed to evoke an emotional response in the listener.  But not every
sound that evokes an emotional response is music.  These howls which
had a definite pitch and which did evoke emotional responses--like
music did--came to be considered music.  Many musicians used electronic
distortion as an integral part of their music.  What helped immensely
with the acceptance of this sort of noise as music is that it often
carried with it a political message that was popular, even if less than
eloquent or more rhetorical than well-reasoned.  This is not to say the
message was wrong, but these were not very good arguments for their
point of view.  Jimi Hendrix did a version of the "Star-Spangled
Banner" at Woodstock that was made up entirely of electronic howls.  At
a time when America was probably making serious ethical mistakes
Hendricks was saying less-than-eloquently, "America bad!"  Atrocious
noise from someone who agrees with your politics does not constitute
music.
     Following WHAT HAPPENED WAS... we went to see what remained of the
director's cut of WOODSTOCK.  This was an outdoor showing and the area
was packed.  We sat on a hill to the side and watched.  We heard
basically something with a beat and a lot of audio distortion.  Joan
Baez then sang about Joe Hill.  I am not all that fond of her music,
but it does have melody.  However I did tell Evelyn that she should
decide if we stay or walk out, and the next performer was another
distortion artist whose beat we could feel on our backs as we went in
the opposite direction.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  varies (9/94 or 10/94) 
Running Length:  1:30 
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Language, mature themes) 
     This is not a date movie, especially if it's a first date.  Oh, it
will give you an endless source of conversational topics, all right,
but WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is almost guaranteed to warp your view of the
entire experience.  The Samuel Goldwyn Company is advertising this as
"an adventure in romance."  More often, however, it feels like some
sort of insidious means of torture.
     The intense feeling of discomfort generated by WHAT HAPPENS
WAS...  is the result of the movie's careful attention to detail.
Everything seems true-to-life, distorted only slightly by Noonan's use
of camera angles and lighting.  The conversation is frequently
interrupted by awkward pauses and the two principals are constantly on
edge, each of them trying to come up with words to fill the aching void
between them.
     Based on Noonan's stage play, this two-person film is a simple
character study that finds its dynamics through the interplay of a very
unpleasant first date.  Jackie (Karen Sillas) and Michael (Tom Noonan)
know each other from the office, but on a personal level, they discover
that they're both basically clueless.  Jackie's image of Michael is far
from the reality, and Michael doesn't even recognize Jackie's
attraction to him.  In that sense, this is a true "blind" date.
     Noonan, who has made a career out of playing the bad guy (LAST
ACTION HERO, MANHUNTER), goes against type with Michael, a
meek-as-they- come paralegal.  Karen Sillas is great as Jackie, a
lonely executive assistant (or, in Michael's words, "Is that what
they're calling secretaries these days?") who is made to appear
slightly menacing as a result of Noonan's choice of lighting.  (Is he
perhaps mocking the FATAL ATTRACTION syndrome?)
     At the start of WHAT HAPPENED WAS..., Michael's character is the
most interesting.  He's smart, witty, and seems to have it all
together.  His opposite, on the other hand, is nervous, flustered, and
indecisive.  During the course of the film, however, a role-reversal
takes place causing our attention to shift more and more towards Jackie
as the layers of her personality are peeled back, onion-like.  The
psychological revelations about these two, and the manner in which they
are uncovered, illustrates a willingness on Noonan's part to take his
story in a refreshingly unorthodox direction.
     The key sequence in the film involves Jackie opening up through a
disturbing "children's story" that she reads to Michael.  It's here
that the audience starts to see the genuine people behind the
carefully constructed, socially acceptable masks.  All sorts of
unsettling things happen during this scene, and the overall tone
undergoes a palpable shift from offbeat comedy to drama.  Nervous or
not, the laughter is over.  Circumstances have become a little too
poignant.
     WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is a talky film, but the dialogue is scripted
with an ear for how people really speak.  Ordinary actions take on
extraordinary significance with nearly one-third of the film spent at
the dinner table.  Later, the pair retires to the living room where
Michael sits nervously in a chair while Jackie strikes a pose designed
to seduce him.
     For something billed as a lightweight romantic comedy, WHAT
HAPPENED WAS... wades through some surprisingly deep waters.  There's
an ending, but no conclusion, and the most obvious unanswered question
has more to do with what is yet to come than with what has already
happened.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is a film that already has rally stripes.  Tom Noonan wrote,
directed and starred in this film which he made for only $300,000 and
took only eleven days to shoot it.  They finished editing the film just
hours short of the deadline for entering it in the Sundance Film
Festival.  But the effort to get the film done in time was repaid.  At
Sundance it won the Waldo Salt screenwriting award and Grand Jury
prize.  Samuel Goldwyn snapped it up for an immediate profit.  Noonan's
face may be familiar to filmgoers for other films in which he has
acted.  He has played psychopathic killers in films like MANHUNTER (the
earlier of the two "Hannibal Lector films") and THE LAST ACTION HERO.
It is good to see him in a more normal role.
     WHAT HAPPENED WAS... is basically a one-act play for two people
produced as a film.  But for a few scenes at the beginning, the film is
all one scene taking place as it happens in front of the camera.  This,
however, is not to imply the film was made in a single take but it does
give the film a certain immediacy.  A woman has invited a co-worker to
her Manhattan apartment for dinner.  Both work in a legal office,
Jackie as a secretary, Michael as a paralegal.  She has been impressed
by his sense of humor and is intrigued by his apparent working on some
secret project of his own.  She has invited him to a candlelight dinner
at her apartment.  The evening begins very awkwardly.  Each has a
talent for choosing just the wrong thing to say to the other.  The date
appears not to be working out at all.  But on and off the wine seems to
be loosening each other up.  They begin trading confidences and
dropping defenses.  Eventually each will know more about the other than
either of them really want.
     Tom Noonan's Michael is controlled and systematic.  Karen Sillas's
Jackie lives with emotional tides that Michael has been able to
suppress in himself.  He is mechanical and she is disturbed.  Noonan's
script gives hints as to how each has gotten that way, but in the end
much is left to conjecture.  Both performances have impressive
authenticity.  My one complaint would be that film is not really the
proper medium for this script.  More appropriate would be the live
stage.  Noonan's direction intentionally makes little use of the
advantages that cinema has over the live stage while it certainly could
benefit from the additional intensity and immediacy that live
performances would have given it.  Making the film more cinematic would
probably have further sacrificed the immediacy.  Noonan at least does
not repeat Hitchcock's error in ROPE of trying to create immediacy by
simulating a single take.  In ROPE Hitchcock apparently realized the
technique became a distraction and he did not repeat his error in DIAL
M FOR MURDER.  Occasionally Noonan misjudges the pacing of his
material, but his direction was usually on-target.
     In spite of the critical acclaim this film is getting, it is not
nearly as original as the rumor mill would have it.  It was reminiscent
of other dramatic works and very similar to a play produced on PBS in
the 60s called, if memory serves, "Birdbath."  While falling short of
my expectations for the film, I would still give it a respectable high
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  You won't see much else like it in the
theaters soon.
