Title
Review for Pants on Fire (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Chute
Credits: Director/Writer: Rocky Collins; Producer: Stephen Apicella;
Director of Photography: Rufus Standefer; Editor: Sherry Daniel;
Original Music: Robert Miller. Cast: Julie: Christy Barron; Max: Harry
O'Reilly; Barry: Neil Maffin; Diedre: Karen Young; Marriage Counselor:
Alice Playton; Mom: Eileen Brennen. No MPAA rating. Running Time 107
minutes. Color.
        Julie (Christy Barron), a grammar school art teacher and
would-be illustrator, is by repute "the nicest woman on earth." But
she maintains that front mostly by grinning broadly and telling people
what she thinks they want hear from one moment to the next; whatever
it takes to keep things bouncy and upbeat. But Julie is also carrying
on an impulsive affair with Barry (Neil Maffin), a co-worker with a
self-rightious streak. As the fibs proliferate and start to pile up
and intertwine, Julie's sunny grin locks desperatly into place.
        The set up is promising, but Rocky Collins' "Pants On Fire" a
mild, sleek attempt at a domestic black comedy in a middle-class,
yuppie-American setting, is neither as savage or as concise as it
should be. This triangular farce of suburban adultery could be a lot
tougher on its characters, though, and at times writer-director
Collins seems to pile on plot complications for the hell of it. In the
work of a great cruel humorist of passion like Pedro Almodovar,
there's a consistant world view, the sense of a malign universe toying
with the characters. The darkness of the comedy in "Pants on Fire"
lacks conviction; it's an attitude Collins is trying on for size.
        There is sharp dialog on display here, and skillfully nuanced
performances in the major roles. Christy Barron's Julie, a femme
fatale by default, emerges as a tactical rather an pathological liar.
She lies in order to keep her options open, to evade a hard-and-fast
choice that she just isn't ready to make. Julie dithers and dodges,
and the film does, too. The one character who knows exactly what she
wants, Karen Young Â‘s Diedre, Barry's abandoned wife, is almost too
passionate a presence, and Collins also ends up dumping her, simply
omitting her from the makeshift "lifestyle choice" that is "Pants of
Fire's" limp subsitute for a finale.
        The most engaging character is Julie's clueless husband, Max,
well played by Harry O'Reilly. A big man whose strong features have
gone soft around the edges, Max is a workaholic Assistant DA embroiled
in a mud-slinging election battle for the top job. He comes on like a
typical callow careerist, clutching his security-blanket cel phone.
But there's something dazed and hesitant about him from the start, as
if he's been awkwardly miscast in his own life---miscast not just as a
high-powered lawyer but as a grown up human being. Unhinged when the
affair is exposed and his wife threatens to bolt, Max torpedoes his
own campaign with visible relief.
        Rocky Collins is no fumbling amatuer, but he, too, may be
miscast, here, as a subversive dark humorist; he may simply have a
more conventional sensibility than he thinks he does.
                                                --David Chute
