Title
Review for National Lampoon Goes to the Movies (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:29, R, Comedy, 1982
Directors: Bob Giraldi, Henry Jaglom
Cast: Robby Benson, Richard Widmark, Diane Lane, Candy Clark,
      Christopher Lloyd, Peter Reigart, Ann Dusenberry, Barry Diamond,
      Elisah Cook, Robert Culp, Bobby Di Cicco, Teresa Ganzel,
      Julie Kavner, Joe Spinell, Titos Vandis, Margaret Whitton,
      Fred Willard, Henny Youngman, Trinidad Silva, Tommy Koenig,
      Olympia Dukakis, Dick Miller
     This film is actually three spoofs of films/television.  The first
segment, "Grow Yourself," is a spoof of personal growth films.  Peter
Reigart kicks his wife out of the house so that the two of them can
grow.  The second segment, "Success Wanters," is a spoof of soap
operas.  Ann Dusenberry, a stripper, uses what she can to climb the
success ladder.  The last segment, "Municipalians," is a spoof of cop
films.  Young policeman Robby Benson is after woman killer Christopher
Lloyd and can't seem to get the knack of things.
     NATIONAL LAMPOON'S MOVIE MADNESS has just been re-released on
MGM/UA Home video under the title NATIONAL LAMPOON GOES TO THE MOVIES.
Supposedly this film originally had a fourth segment making fun of
disaster films, but that is not on the MGM/UA cassette.  This film is
funny and worth seeing.  On a scale of zero to five, I give NATIONAL
LAMPOON'S MOVIE MADNESS a four.  MOVIE MADNESS is rated R for adult
situations, female nudity, adult humor, explicit language, and
violence.
     Henry Jaglom was the director of the "Municipalians" segment and
Bob Giraldi was the director of the "Grow Yourself" and "Success
Wanters" segments.  Olympia Dukakis (LOOK WHO'S TALKING, MOONSTRUCK),
Trinidad Silva (UHF), Dick Miller (MATINEE, AMAZON WOMEN ON THE MOON)
and Tommy Koenig (NATIONAL LAMPOON'S CLASS OF '86) all have brief
cameos in this film.  I liked the drawn pictures that were shown
between the segments.  I think that they make a good segue between the
sketches.
     I feel that "Municipalians" is the best segment in the film.  I
think that it has the best cast and is written better than the others.
It is also the funniest segment.  MOVIE MADNESS is worth seeing just
for this segment.  Robby Benson (WHITE HOT, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST) makes
a great innocent cop.  Christopher Lloyd (BACK TO THE FUTURE - PART 3,
THE ADDAMS FAMILY) makes a great criminal.
     "Success Wanters," which is the next best segment, gets stretched
out too long.  The material can't quite hold up throughout the entire
segment.  Ann Dusenberry (THE MEN'S CLUB) gives a reasonably good
performance, however, I think she could have done a little better.
Robert Culp (HICKEY AND BOGGS, "I Spy") does a great job as the head of
a margarine company.
     "Grow Yourself" is definitely the worst segment.  The script
wasn't written too well and it has many slow spots.  There are some
very funny parts though, so it is still worth watching.  I don't think
Peter Reigert (NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE) gives his best
performance in this film.  Diane Lane (KNIGHT MOVES, CHAPLIN), even
though her name is third on the beginning credits, only has a cameo.
She does a good job though.
