Title
Review for Celluloid Closet, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE CELLULOID CLOSET *** 1/2 Produced & directed by Rob Epstein & 
Jeffrey Friedman. Based on the book by Vito Russo. Narration written by 
Armistead Maupin, spoken by Lily Tomlin. Story, Epstein, Friedman & 
Sharon Wood. Editing, Friedman & Arnold Glassman. Photography, Nancy 
Schreiber. Music, Carter Burwell. Produced by HBO, Channel 4, ZDF/arte, 
Brillstein-Gray Entertainment, Hugh Hefner, James C. Hormel & Steve 
Tisch. Released by  Sony Pictures Classics. 102 minutes. Not rated.
"The Celluloid Closet, Homosexuality in the Movies," published in 1981 
and revised in 1987, is still THE book on that huge subject. Its author 
Vito Russo died in 1991, but I feel certain that other specialists will 
pick up the torch, update and expand this seminal work.
The film cannot reproduce the full book, yet it is a most satisfying, 
comprehensive primer, with many interviewees who all have something 
interesting to say, and with clips from 100-plus films.
Thoughtfully, sensitively and quietly --though it certainly would have 
the right to be polemical -- the documentary follows the inclusion, 
exclusion and depiction of gays in cinema.  
In the history of the movies (now 101 years old), homosexuality was for 
a long time rarely seen on the screen. When it was it came either as a 
source of mocking laughter or as an affliction. TCC ("The Celluloid 
Closet"), does a fine job of avoiding procrustean principles, the kind 
that, in works with a cause, often modify facts to make them fit the 
theories.
Oddly, it is only at the beginning of the film that one finds some 
generalizations. In brief 1895 footage by the Edison studios, two men 
are dancing together to the music of a third. (This gets repeated at the 
end of TCC). But the dancing of two same-sex persons does not 
necessarily mean gayness. It is done in boys' and girls' schools, in 
ballrooms, in countryside dances.
Also,"Rebecca's" sinister Mrs. Danvers  did not necessarily feel a 
lesbian attraction to the first Mrs. de Winter. And in "Rebel Without a 
Cause," Sal Mineo clearly play a (perhaps unconsciously) gay kid with a 
crush on James Dean, but the fact that he had Alan Ladd's photo in his 
locker may be stretching the burden of proof. Many a super-straight 
schoolboy has had pictures of male celebrities.
Be it as it may, TCC has ample illustrations of the mockery of gays as 
flamboyant and effeminate, in early films, followed by surrogate gays 
who were shown as sissies, stock characters as offensive today as Stepin 
Fetchit caricatures of blacks or even Eddie "Rochester" Anderson types 
of eye-rolling frightened supporting cast. The sissies included prissy, 
fussbudgetty types, seldom perceived as gay by their public then, but 
now often seen as such by viewers of old movies.
In the 1930s, from Greta Garbo to Marlene Dietrich, lesbianism (or the 
provocative pretense of it) are convincingly shown. Then come the forces 
of Morality attempting to regiment movies -- first in theory only (the 
Hays Office) then through Hollywood's timorous self-censorship, via the 
now infamous Production Code ruled over by its czar Joseph Breen. When 
the new standards classify homosexuality as a sex perversion, gays go, 
so to speak, underground. There are still on the screen, but in 
camouflaged, coded ways. They also become villains, whether as vampires 
or as humans.
Not so oddly, I find that film crypto-gayness has a parallel in the 
movies made in Central Europe in the days of harsh Communist government 
censorship. Many filmmakers managed to skirt restrictions by avoiding 
overt criticism of the State, through the use of allusions, serpentine 
plots, allegories, semi-secret dialogues with knowing audiences. This 
resulted in a Golden Age of Polish, Czech, Hungarian and Yugoslav 
cinemas. 
In the USA the "gay thing" became a battle of wits in which films like 
"Rope" put over homosexual characters that the censors were unaware of. 
As delicious a case as any is related by Gore Vidal who, having a hand 
in the 1959 "Ben-Hur," wanted to improve drama and veracity by making 
Messala (Stephen Boyd) and Ben Hur (Charlton Heston) childhood lovers.  
Director William Wyler balked until it was decided to confide this 
information to Boyd but hide it from prudish Heston. Armed with this 
knowledge, when we now watch the two actors' reunion as adults, the 
scenes become wonderfully funny.
Equally diverting are the scenes from "Pillow Talk" in which Lothario 
Rock Hudson wants to reassure his skittish prey Doris Day by pretending 
to be gay. We have here a gay man impersonating a straight man 
impersonating a gay. 
More serious is the "desperate need" (in the words of gay writer Arthur 
Laurents and others) of the gay audiences of overwhelmingly straight 
movies to find something of themselves, somewhere. "Crumbs" says gay 
author Susie Bright. These were rare, yet supplemented by codes that 
bamboozled producers and censors but were understood by the gays. The 
problem is like those of all minority audiences who have been exposed 
for decades to overwhelmingly Caucasian, Anglo-mainstream, WASP or 
Catholic cinema and saw nothing of themselves on the silver screen. 
Examples abound, some covert, others not, as in "Suddenly Last Summer," 
that overheated and hysterical film. Gays did appear in 1950s and 1960s 
movies, but mostly as tragic, guilt-ridden characters who as often as 
not were fated to die. And even in the more sophisticated 60s and 70s, 
gays continued to be shown as unpalatable, to put it mildly--with some 
exceptions like the British "Sunday, Bloody Sunday."
With relaxation of rules, eventually homosexuality became the last 
screen taboo. This was broken by the 1961 British film "The Victim," 
and, in America, by the landmark "The Boys in the Band" of 1970. The 
breakthrough was followed by "Cabaret" (1972) and more pictures, but 
there was backlash: mostly bad movies in which the gays were grotesquely 
shown, reviled (as "fag, faggot, queer"), roughed up and sometimes 
gunned down with relish.
TCC goes on to the scandalous "Cruising" of 1980, with its gays now 
being victimizing killers and brutes instead of victims. Unless I missed 
it, the film does not mention that the same William Friedkin who had 
directed "The Boys in the Band" ten years earlier was also the director 
of "Cruising." This speaks volumes about "progress" and conscience. TCC 
also omits the fact that by and large gays have been far gentler people 
than straights. At least this is definitely my own take.
Another milestone came in 1982 with the cards-on-the-table "Making Love" 
which, however, made straight audiences extremely uncomfortable as well 
as inimical. Prejudices die hard. They even show when one of the two 
male leads of that film manages, in an interview, to make sure that the 
viewers know that he is straight.
A flashback here. Arguably, after the Code, the first Hollywood film 
with a major, once-gay character (and a gay bar) was Otto Preminger's 
"Advise and Consent" of 1962. Preminger was Mr. Code-Buster. In his  
1944 "Laura" Clifton Webb (as "Waldo Lydecker") is of a peculiar sexual 
nature.  In the 1953 "The Moon is Blue" the forbidden words "seduction" 
and "virginity" were uttered. In the 1955 "The Man With The Golden Arm" 
Preminger introduced drug addiction. In the 1959 "Anatomy of a Murder" 
detailed talk of sex and panties as courtroom evidence broke more 
taboos.
Near the end of TCC, Susie Bright and Susan Sarandon make cogent remarks 
about the non-menacing nature of female couples as opposed to male 
twosomes. They and others also discuss the bowdlerization of films to 
this day. And gay filmmaker Jan Oxenberg, analyzing "Philadelphia" says 
that it was "still a story about a gay hero who dies, who's a tragic 
figure. It remains to be seen whether Hollywood or the general public 
will embrace a film with a gay hero who lives."
It is true that the doors of the celluloid closet have mostly opened in 
films by independent filmmakers rather than from studios. Even so, TCC 
overwhelmingly relies for its examples on studio movies and Hollywood 
ones at that. Yet it is a documentary of major importance. Its subject 
is so compelling and encompassing that I wish the film had been much 
longer than its 102 minutes; that it had also the time to survey the 
experimental movie scene ("Lot in Sodom" 1933, "Scorpio Rising" 1963) 
and the international one. Examples:  "Madchen in Uniform" 1931, and its 
French successor "Olivia," 1951, both by female directors. The British 
"A Taste of Honey" 1961, "Beckett " 1964, The Dresser" 1983. The films 
of the German Fassbinder and the Spaniard Almodovar. The Italian "The 
Damned" 1969, "Death in Venice" 1971, "The Conformist" 1971,  "A Special 
Day" 1977. The French "Going Places" 1974 and "Menage" 1986. The 
Hungarian "Another Way" 1982 and "Colonel  Redl" 1984. The Canadian 
"I've Heard the Mermaids Singing" 1987. The Mexican films by Jaime 
Humberto Hermosillo ("Dona Herlinda and Her Son" 1986). 
Anyone listening? TCC Part II ought to be another winner.

Author
James Berardinelli
Narrated by Lily Tomlin, and featuring Tony Curtis, Whoopi Goldberg, 
      Gore Vidal, Armistead Maupin, Tom Hanks, Harvey Fierstein, Susan 
Sarandon, Harry Hamlin, and others
Directors: Rob Epstein and Jeffrey Friedman
Screenplay: Armistead Maupin based on the book by Victor Russo
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     While it is commonly assumed, and is often true, that the motion 
picture industry mirrors real life, there are instances when Hollywood 
has had a marked influence on society.  No more is this more apparent 
than in the case of homosexuality.  The thesis of Rob Epstein and 
Jeffrey Friedman's film, THE CELLULOID CLOSET, can be summarized by a 
line from the production:  "Hollywood, that great maker of myths, taught 
straight people what to think about gay people, and gay people what to 
think about themselves."  Unfortunately, most of those lessons have been 
negative.
     THE CELLULOID CLOSET presents a fairly comprehensive overview of 
how the gay/lesbian community has been portrayed in American films.  
Clips from dozens of motion pictures are included -- everything from 
1912's ALGIE, THE MINER to 1993's PHILADELPHIA.  In between, there are 
such well-known titles as MOROCCO (1930), THE GAY DIVORCEE (1933), 
REBECCA (1940), THE MALTESE FALCOLN (1941), ROPE (1948), GENTLEMEN 
PREFER BLONDES (1953), REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE (1955), BEN-HUR (1959), 
SPARTACUS (1960), ADVISE AND CONSENT (1962), CABARET (1972), THE COLOR 
PURPLE (1985), TORCH SONG TRILOGY (1988), THELMA AND LOUISE (1991), and 
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES (1991).  Well-known gay and straight personalities 
are on hand to offer opinions and observations.  These include Tom 
Hanks, Whoopi Goldberg, Susan Sarandon, Tony Curtis, and Harvey 
Fierstein.
     In the silent era, gay characters were used for comic relief.  With 
exaggeratedly effeminate gestures, these thinly-drawn caricatures were 
foils for numerous silent stars, including Charlie Chaplin, who kissed a 
cross-dresser in BEHIND THE SCREEN.  With the arrival of the talkies, 
"the sissy", Hollywood's first stock gay character, arrived.  This 
cliched image of the gay man could be found in such films as THE GAY 
DIVORCEE and CALL HER SAVAGE.
     In the 1930s, Hollywood decided to begin censoring its own films.  
The result was the infamous, and largely ineffective, Hays Code.  While 
the Code didn't eliminate the presence of gay characters in films, they 
became less obvious.  It was also during this time that homosexuals 
started to appear as villains.  During the 1950s, with "masculinity" on 
the upswing, the vitriol against being gay grew more pronounced.  It's 
ironic that one of the biggest stars of the era was Rock Hudson, a gay 
man impersonating a straight man.
     It wasn't until the late '60s when a few films appeared that dealt 
intelligently and sympathetically with homosexuality.  For most of the 
decade, characters of "questionable sexuality" were depressed, unhappy, 
and suicidal -- worthy only of pity and fear.  Few survived the final 
reel.  However, with the 1968 British film, THE DETECTIVE, and 1970's 
THE BOYS IN THE BAND, a slow change was initiated.  The attitude shift 
took a long time to grow roots, however, as the '70s and '80s saw many 
more films with gays as victimizers than as genuine characters.  It was 
only with the advent of the '90s and movies like PHILADELPHIA, THE 
WEDDING BANQUET, GO FISH, and JEFFREY that the homosexual community 
finally had something of quality to celebrate.
     THE CELLULOID CLOSET is one of the most fascinating documentaries 
to put Hollywood under the microscope, standing alongside the THAT'S 
ENTERTAINMENT series and VISIONS OF LIGHT.  In about one-hundred 
minutes, this film convincingly defends its thesis.  Along the way, it 
uncovers some fascinating behind-the-scenes tidbits that few in the 
audience will be aware of (like the motivation for scenes between Masala 
and Ben-Hur in BEN HUR).  THE CELLULOID CLOSET is top-notch 
entertainment, not only because it's enjoyable, but because it argues 
its case with an effectiveness that would impress even a top-notch, 
homophobic attorney.  Now, as more and more men and women emerge from 
the closet, it appears that Hollywood may be taking steps in that 
direction, as well.

Author
Robin Redcrest
This review is also posted at USPAN's 
moviereviews.com web site, at 

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/thecelluloidcloset.html
     I didn't realize how apt the name of this movie was until I called
the MPAA (the Motion Picture Association of America - the folks who
decide what's G, NC 17, PG, R or X) to ask why the preview was rated R.
So that we can make some sense of their response, let me tell you about
the movie itself.
     "The Celluloid Closet" is a documentary about how homosexuality
has been portrayed in the movies over the past several decades.  It's
brilliant, funny, naughty and extremely poignant. It tore at my heart
to watch a gifted lesbian screenwriter explain that, as a rule, gay
audiences hunger for any hint of homosexuality on screen.  Regardless
of how veiled - or how sordid - the presence of a gay or lesbian person
allows others to lessen their sense of isolation and makes them feel as
if they're not quite so invisible as America seems to want them to be.
     The movie itself is rated R - and for good reason. It contains
scenes of bloody, violent gay bashing and graphic, uninhibited, sex. As
with any movie, I appreciate knowing about these things ahead of time,
so I can decide for myself whether to see the movie with a friend, a
date, my 11 year old niece, alone or not at all.
But, that's the movie. Now back to the preview.
     Prior to this film being theatrically released (it was originally
filmed as a documentary for HBO) I had seen the coming attractions
trailer for it at least six times. There was no nudity, no violence, no
bad language, nothing that I could see that would be offensive or
inappropriate for a general audience (okay, Whoopi Goldberg did refer
to someone "boning" someone, but the last I knew that wasn't one of the
seven words you can't say on TV).
Except for a scene of two fully clothed men kissing. Hmmmmm.
     When I inquired about the rating on the trailer, a very nice woman
at the MPAA quoted from "the handbook" that a trailer approved for all
audiences could contain "no homosexuality or lesbianism and no going
down on someone."
     Hello? I was in the office and it was the middle of the day.
Bravely, I pursued.  "I've seen that trailer, oh... probably half a
dozen times," I gulped... "and I don't remember that scene."
     "Well," she chirped. "It's there. Our little eyes are trained to
see that."
No really. In the words of Dave Barry, "I AM NOT MAKING THIS UP."
     They are "trained" to "see that?" When someone who was shocked at
the rating the first time and made a note to watch it carefully the
following five times or so managed to let it slip past her? Gosh, I
certainly don't mean to question the MPAA, or "the handbook". I would,
however, like to suggest that it's they who are in the closet on this
one. And the light ain't good in there.
     But, having seen "The Celluloid Closet," and being one of a
handful of straight people involved in a primarily gay and lesbian
weekly Bible Study (EMail me and I'll give you the details), none of
this was any big surprise. The point of the movie was that
homosexuality,  even in the politically correct 90s, is ridiculously
perceived as a threat to a mostly heterosexual society. A point well
made in this candid and honest film.
     Now, I could go off on the MPAA's ruling that a trailer must
contain "No homosexuality or lesbianism" and ask how that is defined,
particularly in light of some of the things, both sexual and
non-sexual, that I've watched straight people do in trailers. I just
don't feel the need to go there, because it seems so obvious.
     I'll instead suggest that the MPAA re-evaluated their evaluation
criteria. Let the ratings reflect not subject content, like "Sex" and
"Violence". Let them reflect attitude content. In the future, I'd be
interested in knowing whether the movie is rated D for Disrespectful or
S for Stereotyped. Then I'd truly be able to make an informed decision
about how I spent my time.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In my humble opinion, documentaries are the highest of the
cinematic art form.  The best documentaries can let us see worlds we
have never seen before or give us fresh insights into places with which
we naively think we already are familiar.  From the famous
documentaries like TRIUMPH OF THE WILL and HOOP DREAMS to the spectrum
of lessor known but nevertheless fascinating ones like ANNE FRANK
REMEMBERED, FROSH: NINE MONTHS IN A FRESHMAN DORM and THEREMIN: AN
ELECTRONIC ODYSSEY, we learn more from them than most fictional movies.
     To this great tradition is added director Robert Epstein and
Jeffrey Friedman's THE CELLULOID CLOSET which looks at the depiction of
gays and lesbians in the movies from the silent films to the today's
pictures.  Although the film will clearly appeal to homosexuals and to
film buffs, I believe that anyone seeing this documentary will find it
an absolutely engrossing and fascinating movie.  I believe that after
seeing THE CELLULOID CLOSET, I now have a fresh perspective on the
cinema and will never see films in quite the same way again.  This
movie helps you in reading the subtext of the movies better than any I
have ever seen.
     As the movie starts, narrator Lily Tomlin tells us that,
"Hollywood, that great maker of myths, taught straight people what to
think about gays and gay people what to think about themselves."  The
format of the movie, beautifully edited by Jeffrey Friedman and Arnold
Glassman, is to intersperse interviews with mainly gay people in the
film industry with substantial length clips of movies to illustrate
their points.  This technique is a total success, and the editors have
a great sense of how long to stay with each clip and each interviewee
(Quinton Crisp, Tony Curtis, Harvey Fierstein, Whoopi Goldberg, Tom
Hanks, Shirley MacLaine, Susan Sarandon, John Schlesinger, Susie Sharp,
Gore Vidal, and many others).
     Each interviewee talks about his or her feelings about the movies
while growing up or while making movies.  Actor and writer Harvey
Fierstein said, "The hunger I felt as a kid looking for gay images was
not to be alone."  Although the documentary skips around a little bit,
it mainly sticks to a chronological line.  In the early silent films we
see gay people described as, "one of nature's mistakes."  By the time
of the early talkies, gays had become increasingly synonymous with
sissies.  During this period, there were films with more honest and
open depiction of homosexuality particularly those of Marlene Dietrich.
     With the advent of the Legend of Decency formed by the Catholic
Church in 1934, the movie industry agreed to a strict code where many
activities were absolutely forbidden, and the censor had control over
even the small parts of the script otherwise it would not get the seal
of approval and without it no theater owner would dare show the film
nor any studio dare make it.  After this time, gay characters continued
to be in films, but they were much subtler.  Also, during the 30s, gays
were almost always shown as villains.
     The documentary shows clip after clip of movies with characters
that were clearly gay like Peter Loire in THE MALTESE FALCON, but whom
were not acknowledged as being so.  They said the censors were not
"rocket scientist" and so writers got a lot of pictures past them with
gay characters, and the censors were never the wiser.  Some of the
clips you could disagree with, but clearly most of the characters they
claim to be gay or lesbian are.  They interview many screenwriters like
the one who wrote REBEL WITHOUT A CAUSE, who tell how they put gay
characters in their scripts, but had to hide the character's sexual
orientation.
     They showed the homosexual relationships in BEN-HUR and said that
the writer never told Charlton Heston about it, or he would have come
unglued.  They showed CALAMITY JANE with Doris Day singing, "At last my
heart's an open book, and my secret love's no secret anymore," and then
they show scenes where she has a love interest in other women.
     By the 1960s, the cinema was opening up, and the first gay hero
appeared in a British film called VICTIM with Dirk Bogarde.  Most of
the 60s, however, showed gays as unhappy and suicidal, and they usually
died in the films.  As Keir Dullea tells lesbian Sandy Dennis in THE
FOX (1968), "How come you've never married?  You're not bad looking.
..  You've never had a man.  That's your problem."
     One of best interviewees is screenwriter Susie Bright.  She tells
how frustrated she was by movies that would hint at lesbian
relationships and then back off.  She and her lesbian friends would,
nevertheless, go to see them since it was the best they could get.
     In the late 60s and early 70s, happy gay characters began to
appear.  THE BOYS IN THE BAND was one of the first to show gays with
genuine camaraderie among themselves.  The 70s and early 80s also had
gays move from being victims to being victimizers as in CRUISING.
Hollywood would never let the word "nigger" be uttered by anyone other
than a racist southern sheriff, but it showed film clip after film clip
of all the Hollywood stars calling people "fags" or "faggots" as
epithets.  In the 80s films like MAKING LOVE began to show
homosexuality in new open, honest, and explicit ways.
     By the 90s, the climate became much more open, nevertheless, as
Tom Hanks says, "There is a constant desire on the part of the studios
to make characters likable."  The movie ends with k. d. lang singing
her version of "My secret love."
     THE CELLULOID CLOSET runs a beautifully paced 1:42.  It is rated R
for some nudity and sex scenes.  Personally, I think it would be fine
for any teenager that is interested enough to see the picture.  I think
the film is great and recommend it strongly.  I firmly believe I will
be a better viewer and critic after being fortunate enough to have seen
this documentary.  THE CELLULOID CLOSET easily gets *** 1/2 in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The dictionaries define "unique" as "one of a kind."  No more
apt description fits The Celluloid Closet.  Narrated by Lily Tomlin,
using over one hundred film clips from the Thomas Edison experimental
film to the Oscar-winning Philadelphia, the movie is frequently
hilarious, thoroughly entertaining and always informative. The film is
based on the book by Vito Russo, the story of how Hollywood has over
the years shown gays and Lesbians.
     Having seen most of the films from the Chaplin days through the
present, I was surprised to find how little I knew about them.  I
never thought of the comic Edward Everett Horton  as supposed to be
portraying a gay character.  He was just funny and made us laugh.
The truth is I did not even know what a "gay" was.
     We knew about the Hays Office that had the power to censor films.
We knew that the Catholic Legion of Decency  made a list of films
which  good Catholics were forbidden to see.  That was then and
this is now but we still have those who would censor what can be seen,
The rating system is still with us.
     How we learned to view gays and Lesbians and how they learned to
view themselves came in large part from the Silver Screen.  Any
reference to homosexuality was sure to bring a laugh just as comedians
used Brooklyn and Cucamonga as laugh=getters.  Gayness on the screen
could be funny but it could also make you pity the poor unfortunates
A male costume designer was good for a laugh. . . . or a flouncy
waiter . . . . or any of a dozen stereotypes.  No one thought of
them as being homosexual; they were just sissies.  On the one hand
there were the John Waynes and on the other were the sissies.
Quentin Crisp remarks that when a man dresses as a woman, we find it
funny (SOME LIKE IT HOT) but a woman dressed as a man (Dietrich,
Garbo) was not only accepted but even was a source of titillation.
     Again, the film is unique.  My own favorite scene is at the end,
a clip of Tom Hanks and Anthony Banderas in their Navy uniforms, and
the voice over commentary that sums up this wonderful film.
