Title
Review for Delta of Venus (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greta Christina
     When I told a friend of mine about DELTA OF VENUS, his response
was to describe a cartoon he once saw in the New Yorker.  The caption
read, "Life is too short for soft-core porn."
     That's DELTA OF VENUS in a nutshell.  The actual review of this
movie is going to be very short.  In a word: Stinkeroo.  We're talking
seriously boring, folks; ill-conceived, poorly-executed, unrelievedly
dull, and a complete and utter failure in the clit-hardening
department.
     Directed by Zalman King (the same genius who wrote 9 1/2 WEEKS and
wrote and directed WILD ORCHID), DELTA OF VENUS is a quasi-mainstream
art-sex movie loosely based on the wonderful collection of short
stories by Anais Nin. There's a vague plot about the erotic and
artistic awakenings of the main character Elena (Audie England), who is
loosely based on Anais Nin, and her torrid and painful relationship
with Lawrence (Costas Mandylor), who seems to be loosely based on Henry
Miller.  But the plot is pretty much a joke, a frayed and tenuous
thread whose sole function in life is to string together the various
erotic stories and fantasies that Elena experiences and/or imagines.
     Hmmm.  A bunch of sex scenes held together by a tissue-thin plot.
Sound familiar?  Sound like almost every porn movie you've seen?  Well,
you got it 100% right, my friend; pick up your prize at the door.  So
why does DELTA OF VENUS fall under my jurisdiction as the Spectator's
mainstream film critic?  In one word: NC-17.
     One might ask what difference there really is between NC-17 and
X.  There does seem to be a distinction of some sort, although, like
many of our culture's distinctions having to do with sex, it gets
rather hazy and inconsistent when you examine it closely.  There's the
obvious legal difference, of course; NC-17 is copyrighted by the Motion
Picture Association of America, whereas the X rating is not.  In
practical terms, this means an NC-17 movie is one that the studio
bothered to submit to the MPAA and get rated.  An X rating, on the
other hand, is given to a film by its manufacturers, who aren't big
Hollywood studios and couldn't give less of a fuck about the MPAA.  (It
also means, in theory, that movie theaters and newspapers that won't
exhibit or advertise porn flicks should be able to handle the NC-17
stuff.  However, in practice, the theaters and newspapers have been
pissants, and an NC-17 rating makes it almost as hard to get access to
the mainstream movie infrastructure as the dreaded X does.)
     There is, of course, another difference, one that has to do with
the somewhat murkier world of marketing and promotion.  To a potential
audience, NC-17 signals some degree of serious artistic quality.  This
seems to translate as no insertion shots, reasonably high
Hollywood-style production values, and a somewhat better pretense at
"redeeming social importance" than most porn flicks have.  (That may be
a bit unfair of me; HENRY AND JUNE, the first film to get the NC-17
rating, has more than just a pretense at redeeming social importance;
and, in fact I would argue that many porn flicks do as well.  That
aside, I think the point still stands.)  X, on the other hand,
signifies ... well, X signifies smut.  And more power to it.
     But if DELTA OF VENUS and SHOWGIRLS are any indication, there's
another, more significant difference between NC-17 and X.  The
difference:  X is better.  X is hotter, X is more interesting, and much
of the time, X is smarter and better made.
     I do realize that there's a big problem inherent in making an
NC-17 movie, and that's getting acting talent.  After all, Michelle
Pfeiffer and Meryl Streep probably aren't going to do arty soft-core
porn flicks, even if you ask them nicely and offer them lots of money.
(Neither are Antonio Banderas or Ralph Fiennes, more's the pity.)  And
if you're trying to make a nice respectable NC-17 art-sex movie instead
of a nasty old X-rated porn flick, you're probably not going to hire
Nina Hartley or Jeff Stryker.  Which puts you in a bit of a bind; you
have to find non-porn actors and actresses who will nevertheless do
almost-explicit sex on screen.
     Unfortunately, non-porn people who'll do sex stuff doesn't seem to
be the deepest talent pool in the business.  If the quality of acting
in DELTA OF VENUS (or SHOWGIRLS, another recent NC-17 loser) is any
indication, it's a very shallow pool indeed.  Audie England's
performance as Elena is just terrible, the worst of both worlds; she
can't do a hot sex scene, and she can't act.  Her idea of deep
emotional expression is to pout.  She pouts when she's angry, she pouts
when she's horny, she pouts when she's lonely, and when she's having an
orgasm she closes her eyes and--you guessed it--pouts.  Costas
Mandylor as Lawrence isn't much better; his performance consists
primarily of a whole lot of smoldering stares.  Very blank smoldering
stares.  He seems to think that smoldering consists of lowering the
chin, staring very hard at the camera, and emptying one's mind of all
conscious thought.
     And the overall quality of the movie is peculiarly dispassionate.
It's infested with scenes of people dancing wildly through the streets
of Paris, supposedly signifying a mad impetuosity and a surrender to
sensual possibilities.  But the execution is so fake, so forced, that
it winds up having the exact opposite effect.  It doesn't have the feel
of people giving themselves over to the moment; it feels like people
making a stilted and self-conscious attempt to give themselves over to
the moment.  Worse, the sex scenes are ... well, boring.  Tepid.  At
best, one or two of them were sort of pretty, interesting to watch,
kind of.  Not one of them made me wet, and not one of them gave me
something to think about the next time I whacked off.
     Which leads me to the most important quality that I feel makes X a
better animal than NC-17:  honesty.  Even the most pretentious X-rated
porn flick, with the dorkiest arty special effects and camera tricks,
is still very clear about its purpose, which is to get your dick/clit
hard and get you off.  That's not to say that porn filmmakers are never
trying to express themselves artistically or politically; I think, at
least sometimes, they are.  But there's a straightforward quality to X-
rated flicks, a direct and unabashed appeal to the audience's desire to
look at people having sex, that is almost completely lacking in the
world of NC-17.  (An odd tangent:  My computer's thesaurus program
gives the synonyms for "explicit" as "definite, distinct, precise,
specific, candid, frank, outspoken, unreserved."  Well, maybe it's not
a tangent.  Maybe it's exactly the point I'm trying to get across.)
     So if I like X-rated films for their honesty, the obvious
implication is that NC-17 movies are, to some extent, dishonest.  (Or,
at any rate, that DELTA OF VENUS and SHOWGIRLS are dishonest.)  I
realize that these are fightin' words, and I'd like to give an example
of what I mean.  That example, the one that annoys me to the point of
infuriation, is the lack of what I call "nudity parity."  By "nudity
parity," I mean that male and female bodies are exposed roughly
equally, with roughly the same degree of vulnerability.  To put it more
bluntly--if a movie shows pussy, it should show cock as well.  And not
just one or two brief teasing shots flitting by, either.  If there are
buttloads of full-frontal female images, there should be buttloads of
men in their full-frontal glory as well.
     Now, nudity parity is tricky to do if you want your film to get an
R rating.  For some inexplicable reason (I'm sure it couldn't possibly
be sexism), a naked dick is much harder to get past the MPAA than a
naked pussy is.  So when I review R-type movies, I do cut them a bit of
slack on this issue.
     But DELTA OF VENUS isn't rated R.  It never stood a chance of
being rated R, and I doubt that anybody expected it to.  Its subject is
sex, it's full of sex scenes both tender and wild, and it parades
female frontal nudity all over the damn place.  But in scenes where
male frontal nudity would be appropriate, it pulls every coy trick in
the book; covering the guy with sheets, having him stand behind sofas,
shooting him from the back or from the side or above the waist.
(SHOWGIRLS, another NC-17 loser, did the same thing.  The movie's only
actual fuck scene took place, rather conveniently, in a swimming pool,
and Kyle MacLachlan's nude scenes were carefully crafted to keep the
camera away from his dick.)
     Now, if nudity is so important for the movie's artistic statement
about sex, then why is all the nudity female?  I can only think of two
reasons, and I don't think much of either one.  Either the director is
thinking purely in terms of images that will please a het male
audience, or he identifies with the male characters and doesn't want to
make them vulnerable by exposing their dicks to the entire adult free
world.  Either way, it's sexist and dishonest.
     If Zalman King and Eszterhas/Verhoeven (the writer/director of
SHOWGIRLS) are any indication, the guys who make NC-17 movies want it
both ways.  They want to make sex movies, but don't want to be treated
like scum.  They want to make smut, but they want some degree of
respectability as well.  And for all my criticism of the NC-17
aesthetic, for all my criticism of these filmmakers' lack of courage
and vision, I can't argue too much with this desire.  In a better
world, they should be able to do that ... and other filmmakers, better
filmmakers, filmmakers with a serious erotic vision, should be able to
do it as well.  The distinction between NC-17 and X is, in essence, the
distinction between erotica and pornography, between art and smut.  And
as such, it is useless, pointless, arbitrary, and ultimately damaging
to the creative process.
(Written for The Spectator; reprinted by permission of The Spectator
and the author.)
