Title
Review for Comtesse de Bâton Rouge, La (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
Coupling lovers are shot from a cannon.  A young man slow dances with 
his cheek on the scaly bosom of a crocodile woman.  Canada's 
one-and-only cyclops projects cinematic images from his eye.  The 
ghost of the world's most beautiful bearded lady appears in Montreal 
movie theatres.  All these bizarreries, and more besides, are to be 
found in André Forcier's THE COUNTESS OF BATON ROUGE, but the most 
remarkable thing about this movie is how boring it all is.
It seems like a can't-miss premise.  A young Montreal film director, 
Rex Prince (Robin Aubert), meets an enchanting bearded lady, Paula 
Paul de Nerval (Genevičve Brouillette), at a freak show, but she is 
leaving the next day for Louisiana, where she plans to set up the 
"Circus of Happiness" and call herself La Comtesse de Bâton Rouge.  
Hopelessly smitten, Rex follows her south.  Love, lust, and tragedy 
ensue--in that order.  One could imagine a bad movie being made from 
this material, but not a dull one.  It sounds like what you'd get if 
an Angela Carter novel was directed by Fellini, or Southern Gothic 
crossed with magic realism: grotesque comic exuberance, with a hint of 
pathos.  The possibilities are endless, and yet THE COUNTESS OF BATON 
ROUGE lost my interest in the first scene, and never regained it.
The problem with the movie is that it is not really about anything I 
have mentioned above.  No, the carnival freaks, Circus of Happiness, 
etc., serve merely as background for the film's frame narrative, in 
which Rex, now middle-aged and (navel-gazing alert!) bankrupt of ideas 
(having just finished his own film of his relationship with La 
Comtesse), wanders around looking morose and reflecting on the healing 
power of art, the interplay of art and reality, the failure of his 
dreams, yadda-yadda-yadda.  This rigidly structured frame narrative 
chokes the life out of the film's more interesting material.  There 
should be a lot of energy and extravagance--this is supposed to be a 
movie about young love and circus freaks, after all--but what we get 
is tedious and uninspired, weighed down by its pretentions.
It doesn't help that the relationships in the movie have no depth.  
There are various love affairs, requited and otherwise, but they exist 
largely on a symbolic level: they exist so the movie can reflect upon 
their significance, rather than having any intrinsic merit.  I am sure 
Forcier made the movie in good faith, and cared about his characters, 
but that care does not show in the finished product.  The interactions 
are perfunctory, and two characters, Nuna and Biz, are totally 
superfluous.
Making matters worse, Forcier seems determined that every line of 
dialogue have some sort of philosophic import.  This results in a 
neverending succession of ponderous, portentous statements.  Really, 
there are no characters here, just actors mouthing contrived lines, 
sometimes laughably bad.  To wit: "Are you afraid of love?"  "Always.  
But never when I fall in love."  Oh, the irony!
I dunno, maybe it's all supposed to be funny, and I just don't get 
Quebecois humour--but the lifeless, vaguely bluesy score and the staid 
camera work hint that all this is indeed to be taken seriously.  
Various scenes from Rex's own film of his youth (also titled La 
Comtesse de Bâton Rouge) are shown during THE COUNTESS OF BATON ROUGE, 
and these quite obviously are played for humour: they are 
melodramatic, poorly acted, and manifestly the work of someone who 
takes himself much too seriously.  Unfortunately, that describes the 
rest of the film too.
