Title
Review for Dirty Pictures (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "DIRTY PICTURES" (SHOWTIME TV - premieres 5/27)
           In 1989, Dennis Barrie (James Woods), director of the
Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Center, booked an exhibit of shocking
images by controversial photographer Robert Mapplethorpe. Months
later, he learned that Washington D.C.'s Corcoran Gallery had canceled
their showing because of the controversy it evoked. But with the
support of his wife (Diana Scarwid) and Board of Directors, Barrie
forged ahead, unaware of the emotional price that he and his family
would pay when Sheriff Simon Leiss, Jr. (Craig T. Nelson) decided that
five of the photos depicting lewd acts of sado-masochism and
homosexuality, plus two nude portraits of children, were not only
offensive but obscene. "How did this happen?" Barrie wonders. "I never
wanted to be a martyr for a cause." Set in court, this Showtime
Original Movie is the story of that scandal - which was evoked last
year when New York's Mayor Rudolph Giuliani once again used the legal
system as a club when he protested the "Sensation" exhibit at the
Brooklyn Museum. Undoubtedly, this Barrie case is deeply disturbing
but perhaps writer Salman Rushdie puts it best: "If you cannot defend
what - to you - is unpalatable, then you do not believe in free
speech. You only believe in the free speech of those who agree with
you." On the Granger TV Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dirty Pictures" is a
significant 7, bravely tackling the provocative issue of freedom of
expression and dealing with what is our most treasured and troubling
Amendment. It's on Sat., May 27, and Wed., May 31, at 9 p.m. on
Showtime - but beware - the film is for mature audiences only. It
contains the seven disputed images and parental caution is mandatory.
