Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Take note--this review was posted on April Fools' Day! -Moderator]
     With the coming of April, I felt it would be nice to see a
warm-weather sort of movie and the video release of MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING seemed about right.  The title makes it sound as if it is a
carefree sort of film.  WRONG!  What we have is a particularly vicious
exercise in political correctness and anachronism.  What this film
gives us is almost two hours of tiresome lecture on how wise and good
women are and how stupid, gullible, and vicious men are.  The story is
set in some historical never-never land.  The film never even bothers
to tell us exactly when.  Even CONAN THE BARBARIAN, itself set in a
historical never-never land, at least gives you some context as to when
to place it.  But the two films have similar approaches, at least in
their polyglot cultures.  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING seems to be set mostly
in Italy, maybe late 13th Century, but we have Spanish names
indiscriminately mixed into this witch's brew.  In any case, it does
not matter.  The characters and their attitudes are all 1990s, or at
least how somebody sees the 1990s.
     I knew I was in trouble from the very beginning when the film
opened with a song about how faithless and useless men are.  That would
be bad enough, but director Kenneth Branagh puts the words on the
screen and all but puts a bouncing ball with them.  So the whole
audience is reading as well as hearing his sexist diatribe against
men.  The song is sung by Beatrice, the hero of the piece.  (But not
the Hero of the piece.  A rather insipid female character is given the
name Hero.  I am surprised Beatrice is given a name like "Beatrice"
rather than "Sisterhood" or just "Woman." Perhaps the name conjured up
some picture of women beating men.)  Beatrice hates all men, for good
reason no doubt.  At the beginning of the film she is haranguing
against Benedick, who has been off to some war, risking his life for
people like Beatrice.  But her hatred is still strong.  (It's as if she
is saying, "Women, take note.  Do not let absence soften your heart.
Always remember who the Enemy is.  Your country will lie to you about
who your enemies are.  Just remember the real foe is Man.")
     What follows is intended to be a comic mix-up of treachery.  There
is a good schemer and a bad schemer.  The good schemer is case in
anachronistic black.  (Denzel Washington is good, but he is not
convincing as a medieval Spaniard.  I suppose, though, that one must be
politically correct in one's casting.)  The evil schemer is played by
Keanu Reeves, whose acting is the dramatic equivalent of the sound
"thud."  His scheme is to prevent a marriage from taking place and for
this he is branded the villain of the piece.  Little mention is made of
Beatrice's own scheme.  As the film wears on, Beatrice has softened on
Benedick but now hates Claudio.  She gives Benedick the task that if he
loves her (oh, he now loves her for some reason) he should kill
Claudio.  That is on the pretext that Claudio has caused Hero's death,
but Beatrice knows it is not true.  She merely wants to see Benedick
kill Claudio.  The film never says that Beatrice, trying to arrange
murder on what she knows is a false pretense, is doing a bad thing.
The victim, after all, is only a man.  If women murder innocent men,
well, all men are guilty of something or other--maybe for being
"potential rapists."  "Men are deceivers ever," as Beatrice says.  It
is open season on killing them, ladies.  That seems to be the theme of
this rather odious piece of cinema.  And what about the law?  Well,
here the law is represented by Dogberry (Michael Keaton) and he comes
off as being even less than human.  This film is one diatribe against
men after another.
     The photography of Italy is very nice when it does not have some
jerk of a man dancing in a fountain.  (I have never seen a man dance in
a fountain--but the director wants to make men seem a trifle flighty
along with all their other failings.)  The screenplay is by William
Shakespeare, more than likely the pen name for some woman who has been
spending her time in feminist bookstores.  Rating: -2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 9.8 out of 10 (A+, **** out of ****) 
Date Released:  5/7/93 (limited distribution)
Running Length:  1:51
Rated:  PG-13 (Mature themes, nudity)
Starring:  Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Denzel Washington, 
           Robert Sean Leonard, Kate Beckinsale, Keanu Reeves, 
           Richard Briers, Michael Keaton, Brian Blessed
Director:  Kenneth Branagh
Producers:  Kenneth Branagh, David Parfitt, and Stephen Evans
Screenplay:  Kenneth Branagh based on the play by William Shakespeare
Music:  Patrick Doyle
Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is Kenneth Branagh's adaptation of one of
Shakespeare's better-known comedies.  Centered around two
romances--Hero (Kate Beckinsale) and Claudio (Robert Sean Leonard), and
Benedick (Kenneth Branagh) and Beatrice (Emma Thompson)--the story
follows these very different courtships.  For Hero and Claudio, it's
love at first sight and, as with any immediate attraction, they have a
lot to learn about each other.  Beatrice and Benedick, on the other
hand, have known each other for quite some time and it takes a little
none-too-subtle prodding from their friends to help them realize and
admit their feelings.
     With HENRY V, Kenneth Branagh made a stunning motion picture
directorial debut, setting the cinematic world on its collective ear
with a rendering of the story that many considered the equal of, if not
superior to, the legendary Laurence Olivier production.  Now, two films
(DEAD AGAIN and PETER'S FRIENDS) and four years later, Branagh has
again taken Shakespeare to his pinnacle.  If anything, MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING is better than HENRY V.  If Branagh's place as one of today's
standout directors has not been assured before now, this will surely
clinch the position for him.
     For those who don't find Shakespeare's comedies funny (and it can
be something of a stretch to laugh when reading the lines in a book),
this is the film to see.  Simply put, the movie is hilarious.  It isn't
just the lines that create laughter, but the way Branagh has set them
up and the manner in which the actors deliver them.  Expressions and
actions often play a large part in the comedy, some of which is
decidedly physical.  These are the kinds of things that don't appear on
the written page.
     There's also a fair amount of drama in the film as well, and the
performers and director do as well with the serious stuff as they do
with the lighter material.  Pathos and poignancy come as easily and
naturally as humor.  Emotions run high in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, and
cover the spectrum from one end to the other.  Fortunately, everyone
involved is capable of upholding the pacing and tone that the film
demands to be successful.
     The life and vitality of this production are amazing.  Things move
along with a breezy energy that makes it impossible not to get caught
up in the experience.  I defy anyone, no matter how boring they find
the written Shakespeare, to fall asleep during this celebration.  Even
if everything else was low-key (which it definitely isn't), Patrick
Doyle's rousing score alone would be enough to keep many people's
attention.  MUCH ADO is one of the most engaging films I've seen in
years.  That I never once glanced at my watch is testimony enough of
how enraptured I was.
     While Branagh is not entirely faithful to the original text of
MUCH ADO, his film takes pains to capture the play's spirit.  Certain
(mostly small) elements of the source material have been excised, most
of which contain obscure references and jokes that a twentieth-century
audience would fail to either understand or find amusing.  Only
Shakespearean purists are likely to recognize the changes, however,
none of which are gross enough to cause outrage to the few who notice
their absence.  The majority of the audience will never know what's
missing, nor will they care.
     At first glance, some of the casting choices seem odd, to say the
least.  Regardless of how out-of-place certain names look, however,
even the least effective of the performers does a fine job.  No one who
appeared in MUCH ADO has anything to be ashamed of about the effort
they put into the film, or the result that appears on the screen.
     As might be expected, Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson turn out
sparkling, flawless performances.  Neither of them has done better
work.  Considering some of their past roles, that's high praise.  When
they are together, the chemistry is apparent.  It was one of the high
points of DEAD AGAIN and PETER'S FRIENDS, and that's true again here.
Branagh and Thompson are worthy contemporary rivals of any of the
silver screen's great husband-and-wife couples.
     It's refreshing to see Denzel Washington (as Don Pedro) playing in
a comedy.  This may not be his first, but it's his best.  With his
better-known roles coming in films like GLORY and MALCOLM X, it's good
to see Washington doing something lighter.  He fits in perfectly with
the rest of the cast, and race is never an issue.  Casting him might
have been one of Branagh's more daring moves in preparing this film.
Happily, it works.
     If there was to be a poor job done, one would expect it to come
from Keanu Reeves.  Surprisingly perhaps, he acquits himself well in an
admittedly small role (that of Don Pedro's bastard brother Don John,
the villain of the story).  There is fire in his eyes and his few lines
are delivered with cold ruthlessness.  On the other hand, Robert Sean
Leonard's range is occasionally stretched, but the hiccups in his
performance do nothing to damage the film.
     Veterans Richard Briers and Brian Blessed, along with newcomer
Kate Beckinsale, fill out the supporting roles with typical British
flair.  Michael Keaton is marvellous as the over-the-top Constable
Dogberry.  He's like something lifted from MONTY PYTHON, complete with
THE HOLY GRAIL's galloping around on a non-existent horse.
     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is a gem of a movie--real find in 1993's
sea of mediocrity.  It's unfortunate that the film is unlikely to get a
general release, but if the nearest theater showing it is a little
further away than you normally travel, it's worth the trip.  Easily the
best film of the year to date, Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING
is also one of the most entertaining and scintillating motion pictures
to grace the screen in the past decade.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Eric Walker
     After a meteoric career on the stage, Kenneth Branagh made his
directing debut with William Shakespeare's HENRY V, and he immediately
became a name to be reckoned with.  He's a shrewd fellow, with genuine
talent and an ability to carve his own niche in the cutthroat world of
Hollywood movies.  Long after black-and-white movies were considered
anathema, Branagh made DEAD AGAIN, a sly tribute to Orson Welles,
Hitchcock and the "film noir" movies of the 1940s, and again he scored
a box-office hit.  He's one of those "auteurs" who's determined to buck
the system and get the movies made that HE wants to make, without being
reduced to silly brainless Hollywood pablum.  _[}His next film, PETER'S
FRIENDS, was a failure at the box office (and critics didn't like it
either), but it was an ambitious attempt nonetheless.
     And now Kenneth Branagh has made a Hollywood romantic comedy with
a big-name cast; what's more, he's released this movie during the
summer, which is traditionally the time when the mindless,
one-dimensional Hollywood mega-budget blockbuster wannabes are duking
it out for moviegoers' dollars.  Who else but Branagh would have the
nerve (and the ego?) to film Shakespeare as a summer movie?
     And that's what we get with Branagh's return to the Bard: MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING.  When he made HENRY V, Branagh cast his friends from the
British stage, because they had great talent--but they were virtually
unknown to mainstream American audiences.  This movie has clearly been
filmed with the box office in mind.  He's taken an all-star cast--
Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves, Michael Keaton, Emma Thompson (who won
the Best Actress Oscar for HOWARDS END--and who happens to be his
wife), and Branagh himself.  What's more, he's chosen one of
Shakespeare's most popular comedies instead of a drama or a tragedy--a
move, I'm sure, made to ease the worries of the Corporate Bigwigs who
would normally shrink at the thought of foisting Shakespeare--the name
sends chills down the spines of high school students across America--
upon unsuspecting moviegoing audiences.
     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING seems tailor-made for Hollywood summer
entertainment: it has a simple plot, laughs galore, a happy ending, and
you have no question who the good guys and the bad guys are.  What's
more, it includes a healthy dose of sex, and Branagh makes this clear
by including a shower scene during the opening credits, as we see
literally dozens of naked bodies frolicking across the screen in an
effort to get washed washed up so that they can greet the returning war
heroes.  Sex plays a major role in this film: all of the women wear
loose-fitting, low-cut dresses that look more like nightgowns than
dresses, and the men wear billowing, loose-fitting shirts and skintight
trousers that show off their manly physiques.  You can be sure that
none of this was allowed on the live stages of Europe--but today's
audiences won't mind it at all.
     And yet, despite being tailor-made for summer audiences, Branagh
has made a film that will surely appeal to all audiences, be they
Shakespeare aficionados or not.  There's no denying that this is a
high-spirited, zestful comedy that will stand head and shoulders above
the silly high-concept "comedies" being turned out by the major
studios.
     The simple plot may appeal to the Hollywood studios, but this
particular play is one of the Bard's most well-known and beloved for a
good reason: it's as funny as anything you're likely to see on the
screen this year.
     The cast is well-chosen, and each actor fits his role admirably.
Branagh himself knows that the best way to appeal to an audience is to
make fun of yourself, and he does so by playing the role of Benedick,
the determined bachelor who will have nothing to do with marriage and
who delights in trading barbs with the equally headstrong Beatrice
(played by Emma Thompson).  Their being husband and wife serves them
well, for they mesh with a chemistry that leaves you with little doubt
that these are two people who could easily love each other, if they
would only come down off of their high horses and give in just a little
bit.  The wit of their wordplay is rapier-sharp, and they're obviously
having a ball in these roles.
     But the war between Benedick and Beatrice is not the main story:
rather, it's another tale of True Love, straight out of THE PRINCESS
BRIDE.  (Or rather, THE PRINCESS BRIDE obviously borrowed it from
here!)
     Robert Sean Leonard is Horatio, the headstrong, love-smitten young
romantic who falls head-over-heels in love with Beatrice's lovely young
cousin Hero (played by the ravishing Kate Beckinsale).  This young
couple look as though they came straight from John Hughes' teen-angst
comedies, but they play their roles well.  Their dialogue sounds
natural, and even Horatio's temper tantrums are well-played.  Since
Mr.  Leonard landed this role after playing in lesser Hollywood films
(he met Branagh on the set of SWING KIDS, and subsequently landed the
role of Horatio), he must have had a tough time standing up against the
likes of Denzel Washington and Brian Blessed (the grand British actor
who's probably best-known for playing Augustus in I, CLAUDIUS), but if
he had any trouble with his role then it certainly doesn't show here.
     Denzel Washington is having an equally grand time as Don Pedro,
the lord and leader who delights in conspiracy: the subtle plots and
counter-plots that take place are largely his doing.  But it's all for
the good, as Don Pedro wants nothing more than to make his subjects
happy.  He's always smiling and laughing, and it's infectious.
     And there's Keanu Reeves, who plays the conniving, covetous Don
John.  You know he's the bad guy because he's the only one in the
entire film who never smiles; what's more, he declares early on that "I
am a villain" and that he will stop at nothing to destroy the
match-made-in-heaven of Horatio and Hero.  For those who worry about
Keanu Reeves playing Shakespeare after his roles in MY OWN PRIVATE
IDAHO and BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA, I can tell you that you have nothing
to worry about.  Reeves' scenes are brief, and he lets us know that "I
am a man of little words."  However, we're never sure why he wants to
play the villain--a flaw that is never completely covered up.  He's
there, and he sneers a lot, but little more.
     Michael Keaton appears too, as the swaggering Doogberry.  He plays
the traditional Shakespearean fool well, though we never lose the
impression that we're watching BEETLEJUICE all over again when he
appears.  Shakespeare knew he was spoofing himself when he devised this
character, I think, because his nearly incomprehensible speech confuses
the other characters in the film as much as it does the audience.
     So, despite the way the film has been carefully crafted to appeal
to summer audiences, does MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING satisfy?  Indeed it
does.  The characters mesh together well, and the entire movie moves at
a fast, brisk pace that gives us a healthy, earthy feeling of energy
and vigor.  Everyone is smiling and laughing (except the villain), and
nowhere does it feel that this mirth is forced.  You can tell that the
cast had a lot of fun making this movie, and this enjoyable spirit
carries over to the final print.  It's also hilariously funny.  It
takes a while for an audience raised on high-concept action flicks to
get used to Shakespeare's flowing dialogue, but after about fifteen
minutes our ears have been attuned and we're laughing heartily, both
with the cast and at them.  This free and easy approach makes the film
far more enjoyable than Franco Zeffirelli's HAMLET (which starred Mel
Gibson); it seems far less staged and forced than that production did.
     Kenneth Branagh seems determined to acquaint his audience with the
classics, whether they like it or not.  If his future works are as
well-done as MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, then he'll have a long and rich
career ahead of him.  He's out to buck the system, and fortunately for
him the Hollywood studio heads are just stupid enough to miss the fact
that he's thumbing his nose at them.  I wish him well.  MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING is definitely one of the best movies I've seen so far in 1993--
and if the rest of the summer is as disappointing as I think it's going
to be, it may well be one of the best movies of the year.

Author
Jon A Webb
     Kenneth Branagh's adaptation of Shakespeare's play was filmed in
the villa where the woman who posed for "Mona Lisa" lived, and the film
is filled with the influence of the lush sensuality of the location.  I
was struck especially by the presence of water in the film, as water
also figures prominently in the background to "Mona Lisa" (da Vinci was
concerned at the time about the many mechanisms for moving water from
place to place).  I wonder if the painting influenced the movie, or the
villa influenced them both, or if da Vinci's engineering work influenced
the villa and then the movie.
     Branagh does a great job of opening up the play.  Often stage
plays seem stiff and awkward as movies, which depend so much more on
imagery and less on words.  Branagh takes moments from the play and
expands them into effective scenes.  For example, the arrival of the
Prince turns into a sequence of his men arriving on horses, the hurried
washing of the men and women in the ubiquitous water, ending in their
meeting as two opposing military forces might meet during a cease
fire.
     I wasn't as happy with the play itself.  Kenneth Branagh and his
wife Emma Thompson play the principals, and are a lot of fun to watch
(exchanging witty barbs) until they fall in love, and they have little
reason to continue being in the play.  At that point, the story turns
into a ridiculous farce.  Part of the problem here is that the story is
based on the actions of the two young lovers, the man played by Robert
Sean Leonard and the woman whose name I don't recall.  Since it's
pretty obvious what is going to happen, and the characters don't have
very much interesting to say, the movie drags a little.
     Michael Keaton rescues the film at this point, though.  He plays
one of Shakespeare's comic relief roles, and does it so well I think
that that Shakespeare himself would have been proud to see it.  He was
hilarious.  He really showed how a great actor can turn a minor role
into something memorable.
     I thought Denzel Washington was appropriately regal as the
Prince.  He is always fun to watch.  Keanu Reeves was okay as the
villainous Prince's half-brother.
     The ending of the film, with its widening circles of joyful
dancing, makes the audience feel part of the action and inspires one to
applause.

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
David Rind
     I would not normally have written this review but I was dismayed
to see a less than favorable review of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING appear
here, and would be sorry to have anyone miss this wonderful movie.
     Kenneth Branagh has directed his second Shakespearean play (after
HENRY V) and again stars with his wife Emma Thompson.  I had neither
read nor seen MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING previously, and so was able to see
it fresh in its own right.
     The movie tells the story of two couples.  The older couple,
Beatrice (Thompson) and Benedict (Branagh) are anti-romantic to the
point of misandropy and misogyny.  The younger couple, Hero (Beatrice's
cousin) and Claudio (Benedict's close friend), meet and fall instantly
in love.  The (good) other characters conspire pleasantly to have
Beatrice and Benedict fall in love, while (evil) other characters
conspire viciously to drive Hero and Claudio apart.
     It seems presumptuous to even critique the writing, but I was
impressed at how real and intelligent the characters seemed within this
farce.  The dialogue sparkles with wit and understanding.
     The direction of this movie is superb.  Branagh is one of the
premier directors working today.  HENRY V showed that he could make a
rousing, powerful war movie, and DEAD AGAIN showed that he could make a
Hitchcockian thriller as well as Hitchcock (which even DePalma has
never quite done).  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING shows that he can also make
a romantic comedy.  He never seems to waste a scene or a shot.  The
movie flows brilliantly from its opening sequence of villagers and
soldiers getting ready to greet each other, through to the closing
dance in the castle.
     Branagh and Thompson are superb.  They bring their 16th century
characters to life.  The supporting actors are wonderful as well.
Keanu Reeves plays the villain and is appropriately dark.  Michael
Keaton is fantastic as comic relief in the form of a village fool.
Denzel Washington is excellent as a prince -- the leader of the troop
of soldiers.  I was not sure how it would work to have Denzel
Washington (who is black) cast as the brother of Keanu Reeves (who is
white), but after a few minutes this was not in the least distracting.
I suspect that cross-racial casting could work far more often if
Hollywood had the nerve to try it.
-- David Rind rind@enterprise.bih.harvard.edu

Author
Gregory N. Bond
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves,
          Richard Briars, Brian Blessed, Michael Keaton, Ben Elton.
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Script:   Some bloke named Shakespeare.
[Probably old news to many, but it's just opened here]
     I went into MUCH ADO with very high expectations.  Branagh's
previous Shakespeare project (HENRY V) was a wonderful movie, and the
reviews I had seen about MUCH ADO were uniformly good (the best set of
reviews I'd ever seen for a film).
     I came out knowing that every one of those rave reviews was right
on the money.  This is the best film I have seen in years.
     MUCH ADO is the story of two pairs of lovers, the young and
innocent Claudio and Hero (two good-looking nobodies with very few
lines) and the older, sharp-tongued and cynical Baldick and Beatrice
(Branagh and Thompson).   There is celebration, betrayal, revenge, and
weddings.
     The dialog crackles and fizzes (as would be expected given the
author), with quips, puns, one-liners and razor-sharp wit flowing
faster than I could follow.  This is a *very* funny film despite being
in somewhat archaic language.
     The cast does a magnificent job.  Chief among them are of course
Branagh and Thompson.  Both have such fluency with the style and such
assured delivery that the antiquity of the language isn't even
noticed.  Branagh in particular shows an excellent sense of comedy in
both his acting and direction.  There is a long sequence when he is
hiding in the garden eavesdropping on a conversation, that is almost
Keystone Cops.
     The remainder of the cast does an excellent job, also handling the
language well.  Some interesting casting puts Denzel Washington and
Keanu Reeves as half-brothers, and all actors use their own (American
or English) accents, but the overall result is still consistent and
reputable.
     The cinematography is just fabulous.  The whole film was shot on
location at a Monastery in Tuscany, and it looks just superb.  The
soundtrack could be criticised for a lack of period relevance and being
at times quite overpowering, but it is none the less effective.  A
number of lute and voice songs are woven into the story in a very
effective manner.
     Overall, this film is simply a delight.  Run, don't walk, to your
nearest cinema and see it on the big screen.  It's worth every penny of
the AU$10 you will pay.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING proves that his
critically acclaimed 1989 production of HENRY V was no fluke.
     With his new film, Branagh once again brings one of William
Shakespeare's most popular works lovingly to the screen.  Some might
argue that a second adaptation of the Bard in four feature films is
nothing less than egotistical on the part of this "brilliant" young
director/actor.  But fortunately Branagh, the golden boy of British
cinema, doesn't let his ego interfere with the task at hand, and it's
to his credit that Shakespeare is very much the star here.
     Shot exclusively on location in Italy, MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is
a lusty, vigorous, sun-drenched romp in which two parallel love affairs
intertwine with comedic and dramatic results.  It's a 17th Century
picnic, with love, lust and trouble being but a few of its main
ingredients.  The rousing title sequence, in which the pounding hooves
of horses bringing men home from battle are cut against the eager
rushings of womenfolk readying themselves, sets the tone for the
sensual imagery that is to follow.
     Branagh and real-life spouse Emma Thompson (last year's Oscar
winner for HOWARD'S END) play Benedick and Beatrice, mental sparring
partners that put even Burton and Taylor to shame.  "If her breath were
as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near her," snips
Benedick after one particularly heated interchange.
     The skirmishes of wit between them is matched only by their dogged
determination to remain single.  Benedick is little more than a
blowhard and Beatrice, although more well-rounded, freely confesses
that marriage is not for her--"not till God make men of some other
metal than earth."  It's pretty obvious that they have the hots for
each other, and it's great fun witnessing the transformation of their
put-downs, cuts and slurs into suggestive come-ons and gooey-eyed
fawnings.  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING may be almost 400 years old, but
time has not dated this battle of the sexes.
     As an actor, Branagh's command of Shakespeare is impressive, and
his flamboyant soliloquies and readings bring new life and vitality
to the words.  And Thompson, whose acid-tongued Beatrice is "born to
speak all mirth, and no matter," is equal to Branagh.  Together, their
performances make the language viable and altogether accessible.
     Although the nubile young lovers Claudio (played by Robert Sean
Leonard, the aspiring actor in "Dead Poets Society") and Hero (newcomer
Kate Beckinsale) have less to do than Benedick and Beatrice, their
youthful innocence and exuberance for life perfectly complements their
warring counterparts.  Theirs is a love that is about to be undone by
the treachery of others.
     In addition to the leads, Branagh has assembled a stellar cast of
ensemble actors.  Denzel Washington is fine and upstanding in the role
of the dashing Don Pedro, and his intimate scene with Thompson is quite
touching.  Keanu Reeves' villainous Don John is all sneer and no shirt,
a well-greased torso that inspires hisses from the audience at every
turn. Heinous facial hair, Ted!
     There are some familiar faces among the supporting cast as well.
Brian Blessed, the wooly, teddy-bearish character actor of many British
films, guffaws his way through his role of Antonio with roguish
aplomb.  And Richard Briers (of the British television import, "Good
Neighbors") is equally affable as the patriarch Leonato, under whose
impressive da Vincian auspices this tapestry of lies, deceit and
revenge unravels.
     As in many of Shakespeare's plays, there's a bawdy entourage of
assorted bit players designed to add some levity to proceedings.
Michael Keaton's Dogberry, Constable of the Watch, is more or less a
reprisal of his character in BEETLEJUICE, a confusion of facial
contortions and bad teeth.  Unfortunately, some of his character's
choicest malapropisms are lost in the shuffle.
     Although the film is a comedy, there are some dark and fiery
moments to offset the lighthearted revelry.  These are best exemplified
in the wedding scene, in which the falsely accused Hero is attacked by
both her father and her betrothed, Claudio.  This scene, in which
Hero's friends and family are slow to protect her, is quite
terrifying.  When MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING gets serious, it is
genuinely powerful, and Branagh (as director) does a fine job of
balancing wit, melodrama and tenderness.
     "Man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion" waxes Benedick
eloquently towards the end of the film.  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is
itself a giddy thing, a good looking film, full of good looking
people--fresh faces, fine features, and firm, bronzed skin.  Summer has
indeed arrived!


Author
Steve Rhodes
    MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is another Shakespearean film from that
Shakespearean master Kenneth Branagh.  There is no one today who can do
Shakespeare like Branagh, see, for example, his HENRY V, which was
number one on my list the year it was released.  In MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING, he wrote the screen adaptation as well as did the direction.
     I will assume that most of you know the plot In MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING from school so I will not repeat in detail here.  Suffice it to
say that there are a pair of lovers - one younger, Hero (Kate
Beckinsale) and Claudio (Robert Sean Leonard), and one older, Beatrice
(Emma Thompson) and Benedick (Kenneth Branagh).  The younger pair know
they are in love and plan to get married in a week, but the nefarious
Don Pedro (Denzel Washington) tries to keep the wedding from happening.
The older lovers fight like an old married couple and claim they hate
each other.  Typical Shakespeare, there are a lot of other characters
including Keanu Reeves as Don John, Richard Briers as Leonato, Brian
Blessed as Antonio, and last, and certainly least, Michael Keaton as
Dogberry.
     The movie is uneven, but the range is from good to outstanding.
Whenever Kenneth Branagh and his lover Emma Thompson have any scenes
together, it is as close to perfection as it gets.  They have so much
energy, it makes you feel alive and glad to be on any planet they
inhabit.  They are the older lovers in the show, but by far and away
the most interesting.
     The younger lovers' acting abilities are okay at best.  Robert
Sean Leonard's acting is quite unsure in the early scenes, but he warms
up a bit to the part as the movie builds steam.  On the whole, I found
their romance a disappointment.  I still remember ROMEO AND JULIET
(1969) so I know how great it can be.
     Although Denzel Washington is in the film, his heart and passion
seem to be somewhere else.  This is the first show I have seen him in
where he did not steal the show.  He is fine in his role, but nothing
special.  The only serious problem in the casting is Michael Keaton.
As an actor, when he is good, he is very very good (see for example
CLEAN AND SOBER), and when he is bad (don't see ONE GOOD COP), he is
awful.  I have not seen such overacting in a long time as his acting in
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.  The only saving grace is that he only has a
small part.
     The technical aspects of the movie are outstanding.  The
cinematography by Roger Lanser and the sets by Tim Harvey are lush and
gorgeous.  The music by Patrick Doyle is breathtaking.
     If you feel in the mood for a movie not costing something
approaching the national debt to produce, if you actually enjoy humans
in your movies (no, I am not dinophobic, but there is more to life than
JURASSIC PARK), if you especially like humans who can talk and have
something to say at the same time, if you like screens smaller than
Candlestick park, then go to your local art house and see MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING.
     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING runs 1:51.  It is correctly rated PG-13 and
would be fine for any kid old enough to appreciate the Bard.  I
recommend the show to you and give it ***.  I look forward with great
anticipation to Branagh's next Shakespeare piece, and the one after
that, and the one that ...
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mike Watson
Much ado about nothing.  Ah, how sweet the irony!
It's accepted wisdom in some circles - among English literature nuts,
mainly - that whenever a critic knocks Shakespeare they are only doing
so through ignorance.  He just doesn't "understand" Shakespeare, you
will hear them say.  The Bard's work is apparently beyond criticism.
What a load of old cobblers.  If these arbiters of public taste think
Kenneth Branaugh's film of Shakespeare's "comedy" MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING is comedy in any modern sense of the word, it's time to get a
life.  Get Monty Python.  Get Woody Allen.  Get John Waters.
Whatever.  Just get a real taste of some clever, witty, risky comedy.
And banish this nonsense to where it belongs.  Drama and tragedy was
Shakespeare's strength.  To my sensibilities - and I'm no stick in the
mud - MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING resonates with no spark whatsoever.
No kidding: this film ranks among the most embarrassing two hours I
have ever spent in a cinema in my 20 years of movie going.  The only
thing that stopped me walking out was loyalty to my lady friend, as
this was our day out and I hadn't seen her in ages.  But boy, does she
owe me one!
I won't spend too much time on the plot.  Basically, we follow the
trials and tribulations of two would-be couples - one young, the other
older.  There's some dark treachery amongst all this, but everyone is
so awfully jolly that you'd hardly know it.  Mind you, there's nothing
wrong with the basic story.  Good romantic comedies based on similar
premises abound.  Nothing wrong with most of the cast, either.
Branaugh, Emma Thompson and Denzel Washington are all talented
performers.  
The problem is the script, or more accurately, Shakespeare's original
text.  Light comedy shouldn't be complex.  Yet wrapped in Elizabethan
English, the dialogue becomes difficult to comprehend.  For this alone
it will be a problem for modern audiences unschooled in Shakespeare
and in search of nothing more than a good, undemanding laugh.  The
only laughs to escape my belly were brought on by the gloriously inept
performance of Keanu Reeves, the actor once again miscast as a jealous
half-brother or something.
But when dissected and understood, what it all boils down to is that
this stuff is just so goddamn lame.  This is comedy so clean and nice
and corny and so devoid of danger that it leaves this viewer totally
cold.  Ho, ho, ho, boy likes girl!  Ho, ho, ho, men are such klutzes!
Ho, ho, ho, she's so awfully clumsy!  Oh please!  There's wit in here
somewhere, I'm told.  I call it pretentious.  Something lightweight
striving to be something sophisticated through clever wordplay.
In the end, it's cringeworthy.  Watching some of the cinema patrons
around me collapse with laughter made MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING a very
weird movie going experience.  Comedy?  Bah, humbug!

Author
Pedro Sena
William Shakespeare is fun to do, even if the stories are a bit on the
deus-ex-machina side of things.  And the English theatre has for many years
been known for its interpretations of the master thespian, in various ways.
Some are adventurous productions that defy the imagination, like Macbeth
done in Nazi outfits.  Some other ways are unusual, like  Peter Brook's
fabulous interpretation of A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM...  and other
productions simply try to innovate the style with well placed dialogue and
beautiful visuals, namely Franco Zeffirelli.
And then, there is Kenneth Brannagh.  His productions, like HENRY V, are, by
all standards, plain and simple, period pieces, with excellent acting, and
well thought out film scenarios to help the play come across as
well written, and well thought out.  On stage, MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, is a
mess.... you have to know the play, and know the meandering, to stay in
touch with the story, and the eventual outcome.  The "funny" and "fancy"
dialogue, at times distracts the whole thing.  But, on film, one can
manipulate things just enough, to make the story comprehensive and clear...
so did Franco Zeffirelli at least twice, and so has Kenneth Brannagh, at
least one other time.  One gets the feeling, that, since he is a well
trained Shakespearean actor, he knows the plays so well inside out, that he
only has to decide what he wants to do with it.... and make sure that people
can follow it easily enough.
Needless to say, this production of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, is probably as
clear as you will ever see and understand the whole thing.... it is
simplified to the chasing of the two main characters in the story,
Beatrice and Benedict.  And the rest that is brought to light, is just the
stuff that deal with them, either coming apart, or coming together.
What is left, is an incredible array of well cast people, in very choicy
roles.  For the lover Don Pedro, Denzel Washington is cast, and being a dark
man, he brings up the well thought out stories of the moor being good
lovers, and the other fantasies that had been around for many years, in both
Italy and Spain.  For the crazy,
Dogberry, an American is cast, and they let him run amuck with the whole
thing, pretty much stealing the show.... it is a shame that HE DIDN'T get
the a nomination for any awards, because his rendition of the nutty
Dogberry, could keep an audience on its feet the whole show.  In the English
isles, the consensus has always
been that Americans are a bit too wild.... excellent cast.  And for the
sharp witted, star crossed lovers, of course, you got to have  two
Brittons.... Kenneth and Emma.  And Beatrice gets the better of the two
roles, for she has a much sharper tongue than Benedict.  She doesn't have to
show off to the girls around her. He has to keep up with his image.  And in
between, are many other well cast people, that make this play so enjoyable
that it may very well be the next best Shakespeare that you can enjoy, other
than ROMEO AND JULIET.
With a beautiful set up, and great period music, this film plods along,
although I ( personally ) might find it slow, since I know the play. And it
makes for a wonderful evening of entertainment.
Well directed, and well designed from a camera point of view to make the
whole thing clear ( the play does not offer such wonderful insights ), one
can appreciate the dialogue between characters ( and who is saying
something in the middle of anyone else's lines -- the main cause of the
confusions on stage )much better, and realize to whom each line  is
delivered, and which lines are the character's thinking.
Well worth your consideration, for a very entertaining show... beware that
the exchanges of dialogue are extremely fast at times, and your appreciation
may be lessened because you didn't hear what he, or she, said.
But even if you didn't catch it, the way it is set up, you know what it
related to..... directing a play, specially one so well known, and make
these things SO CLEAR, is not easy, and is a great achievement.
