Title
Review for Naturally Native (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Directed by Jennifer Wynne Farmer and Valerie Red-Horse
     Naturally Native, the first movie by, about, and starring Native 
American women, is at its core a  story of identity crisis.  In its 
specifics it's about Indian issues, but part of the irresistibility of 
this maiden effort from co-directors Jennifer Wynne Farmer and Valerie 
Red-Horse (from a screenplay by Red-Horse) is the breadth of its appeal. 
     Three young sisters of the California Viejas tribe are adopted by a 
white woman when their alcoholic mother dies giving birth to the 
youngest.  They grow up in a Presbyterian Anglo world.  Vickie (Valerie 
Red-Horse) is the eldest, and the only one with memories of life on the 
reservation.  She's now 33, with a loving husband (Pato Hoffman), and 
two kids, living in the pleasant San Fernando Valley suburban house 
where she and her sisters were raised.  Karen (Kimberly Norris 
Guerrero), the middle sister, has just finished business school, and is 
living there too while she contemplates a job offer in Chicago.  The 
youngest, Tanya (Irene Bedard), has also moved home to regroup after a 
failed stab at show business.
     Vickie, the only one to have returned to the reservation and talked 
to their father before he died, has herbal lore that she learned from 
him.  She has recipes for everything from burn cream to shampoo, and the 
sisters hit on the idea of marketing these products.  Armed with Karen's 
solid business plan, they go looking for a small business loan to get 
started.  But everywhere they turn they're rebuffed - for not being 
Indian enough, for being too Indian, for being the wrong kind of Indian, 
or for variations on those themes.  The most entertaining of these 
scenes (and they're all good) involves Mary Kay Place as a spiritualist 
trading on the vogue in Native American ways. 
     The movie deals with a range of Indian issues, from alcohol 
intolerance to casinos to ethnic identity.  But it seldom beats us over 
the head.  The filmmakers, not always able to avoid moments of 
exposition and didacticism, have the grace and skill to skip right by 
them, recovering with such charm and sincerity that we forgive the 
moments as soon as they're past.
     At the center of this movie, in virtually every respect, is the 
wonderful Valerie Red-Horse, who wrote and co-directed, and who anchors 
the story with her intelligently appealing and layered performance as 
the feisty, indomitable, and sometimes insecure suburban housewife.  
Guerrero is also excellent as the sweet-tempered business whiz, and 
although Bedard's flibbertigibbet is annoying in places, she redeems the 
character as the story progresses.  Pato adds a strong anchor as 
Vickie's husband.
     The sisters are genetically Native American, spiritually Christian, 
culturally Anglo, a mini-lost tribe within a society that sometimes 
embraces them, sometimes rejects them, and sometimes victimizes them.  
But significantly, they're strong individuals who take responsibility 
for themselves.  Farmer and Red-Horse have a lot to say about identity 
and feminism, but they're secure enough to have fun with it, even 
reaching into the Victoria's Secret catalogue for some playful 
image-tweaking.  They've made an issue movie that is thoughtful without 
being preachy, confrontational without being angry, a movie that's 
funny, romantic, inclusive, and downright satisfying.
