Title
Review for Casualties of Love: The Long Island Lolita Story (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:40, not rated, Drama, 1993, Made-for-American-Television
Director: John Herzfeld
Cast: Jack Scalia, Alyssa Milano, Phyllis Lyons, Leo Rossi,
      J. E. Freeman, Peter Van Norden, Lawrence Tierney, Anne DeSalvo,
      Michael Bowden, John Perry, Nicky Corello
     Alyssa Milano plays the notorious Amy Fisher in this adaption of
the controversial story.  Milano supposedly started an affair with Jack
Scalia (Joe Buttafuoco) and ended up attempting to kill his wife
Phyllis Lyons (Mary Jo Buttafuoco).
     CASUALTIES OF LOVE: THE 'LONG ISLAND LOLITA' STORY, CBS's version
of the Amy Fisher story, aired back on January 3.  The film is
currently set to be released on video cassette on April 7 (the same
time as NBC's AMY FISHER: MY STORY, r.a.m.r.# 1664). Of the three Amy
Fisher films, CASUALTIES OF LOVE is by far the best.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give CASUALTIES OF LOVE a five.  The video cassette
version will contain some scenes that were too racy for television.
     The cast for this film is excellent and ends up being above the
normal television film cast.  Alyssa Milano (CRASH COURSE, LITTLE
SISTER) is great as Amy Fisher.  She even did better than Drew
Barrymore (ABC's BEYOND CONTROL: THE AMY FISHER STORY), who tends to be
excellent in this kind of role.  Jack Scalia was very good as Joey
Buttafuoco.  I think that he did better in that role than the actors in
the other two versions.  I wasn't too impressed with Phyllis Lyons
acting.
     CASUALTIES OF LOVE is written from and biased towards Joe and Mary
Jo Buttafuoco's point of view, so it is biased towards their point of
view.  If you are only going to watch one of the Amy Fisher films when
they get released on video cassette, I suggest that you choose this
one.  I don't know how much of it is true, but it makes for good
viewing.
