Title
Review for High Wind in Jamaica, A (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
An excellent adaptation of Richard Hughes' novel, and one of my
all-time favorite films.  If you've ever wondered what might have
happened to the Lost Boys if they'd left Neverland and taken up with
the pirates then this one-of-a-kind drama may show you some
possibilities.  An English family living in Jamaica decides to return
home after a hurricane destroys their house; also, the mother of the
family believes her children have lost the civilizing influence of
life in England.  The children barely make it out to sea before they
inadvertently end up on a freebooters' ship, captained by Anthony
Quinn and first mate James Coburn, from which point on the storyline
moves in quite unexpected directions.
Story is not told exclusively from the point of view of either the
adults or children, but rather from the ambiguous area where both
viewpoints meet in conflict.  We accept that each character's behavior
is completely rational (partly because we recognize the conventions of
adult life and still remember the world of childhood) but the
characters themselves fail to comprehend each others' differing world
views.  It's this conflict that eventually creates a strange power
play on board ship between the pirates and the children.  The sailors'
superstitions and fears become realized through the games and antics
of the youngsters - placed within a different context their innocent
capering takes on new, ominous dimensions - and it isn't long before
the entire crew is on edge.  Soon there is mutiny in the air.
Quinn and Coburn make great pirates, but it's Deborah Baxter as Emily
who you'll really remember - whatever happened to her?  Emily's
concerned eyes and searching expression tell us more about what's
going on inside her head than any other character: here is a girl who
is uncertainly taking the first steps into that nebulous zone between
childhood and adulthood - this voyage could be interpreted literally
as her rite of passage.  As this area is where the film's perspective
lies it could be that we are approaching the story from her viewpoint.
Unbelievably, one recent television screening cut the scene in which
Emily sits aloft with legs astride the mast, singing a love song while
the Captain gazes up at her.  Surely the sexual subtext in this scene
was too subtle to warrant it being censored - without it, the film's
final moments lose their real meaning: Emily, like Jenny Agutter at
the conclusion of WALKABOUT, looks back on a strange, dreamlike event
in her life and wonders if she has lost something, yet gained
something because of it.  Film's narrative is constantly engaging. 
Director Alexander Mackendrick handles the intelligent screenplay with
a deft touch that keeps the film from self-consciously recognizing
it's own offbeat quality.  Harmonica player Larry Adler wrote the
score, which makes good use of swoony, seductive Spanish themes and
contributes even further to the dislocated overall effect of the film.
