Title
Review for Gawain and the Green Knight (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Gawain and the Green Knight (1973) 93m.
You'll have to be in the right mood to enjoy this simple mediaeval fantasy, 
or at least acknowledge that it subdues the cinematic visual stylings we 
might expect from knights-on-horseback adventures.  Although the poem, 'Sir 
Gawain and the Green Knight', is one of the best known British mediaeval 
epics outside of Beowulf, its central character is less a household name 
than other Arthurian champions such as Lancelot, Galahad, and Bedevere.   
Personally, I find this down-scaled approach more suitable for Gawain's tale 
than the kind of treatment usually afforded the aggrandized romances of his 
better-known contemporaries.  Gawain is an ordinary man, not some superhero 
- when he gets in a fight he gets beaten up quite a bit, and has to struggle 
for the upper hand.  The film opens with the mysterious Knight (played, 
appropriately enough, by Nigel Green) appearing before Arthur's court in the 
New Year and demanding the head of Gawain (played, appropriately enough, by 
Murray Head) as the prize in a bizarre game.  Given a year's grace, Gawain 
immediately sets off in search of the Knight for a rematch.
Bearing only a passing resemblance to the epic poem (which is more a test of 
Gawain's character), Stephen Weeks' film is an amalgam of two standard 
motifs, the Quest and Damsel-in-Distress.  Its indecisive narrative may 
cause some viewers to give up before the story is half over, but in an odd 
way it adds to the atmosphere of the picture.  It seems as if Gawain is 
getting nowhere on his journey - he is sidetracked constantly and has no 
clear idea of where he is heading.  We can never be sure where he is or 
where different places are in relation to each other.  Characters keep 
dropping out of the story and then returning, further suggesting that Gawain 
is making little progress.  The course of the journey is plotted 
chronologically (the passing of the seasons), not geographically.  The 
inconclusive musical score sounds like it was recorded without any visual 
cues from the film and dropped in just anywhere.  All of these things make 
Gawain's experiences seem like a dream, but his final revelation shows us 
that his journey was never intended to take place on land, but instead 
through time.  The passage of his maturation over one year gives added 
significance to the colour green (not only marking the order of the natural 
world, but also his inexperience and youth) that appears throughout the 
story at crucial points to guide him onwards - note that director Weeks is 
otherwise careful to avoid using green in all sets, costumes, backdrops and 
props.
Weeks' own disastrous 1982 remake, SWORD OF THE VALIANT, only makes this 
simple version look better by comparison.  Since he didn't really stick to 
the specifics of the poem in the first place (with the exception of the 
opening scene), you have to wonder why he even tried a second time.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
