Title
Review for Valmont (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Alan Jay
Capsule: A freely adapted version of the novel LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES"
this film gives a new light a feel to the version that many of us have
already seen.  Beautifully shot in widescreen this is an excellent
entertaining adaption of the book. +3
     This film has taken nearly three years to reach the UK as it was
made around the same time as the Stephen Frears version with Glen Close
and John Malcovitch.  This version does not take the Christopher Hampton
play as its staring point but goes back to the original book.
     Again rather than leaving us with a highly florid language of the
original Milos Forman has created a naturalistic dialogue and image of
the protagonists.  No longer do we see nasty evil people doing
unpleasant things to each other but we see characters who show a veneer
of harmless normality while they scheme.
     The film look stunningly beautiful throughout and the performances
are excellent.  The cast is all very young and the 15-year-old virgin
who is being married really does comes across as a sweet innocent.  The
manipulation is still there but it is less blatant to the players while
the audience gets the overview of the game and can see how things start
to go wrong.
     Colin Firth and Annette Benning's performances are excellent.
Colin Firth who was at the screening said how interesting it was to play
as Milos Forman insisted that the character be very naturalistic and not
give any impression of his nature through his behaviour or speech.
     I would thoroughly recommend this film whether you have seen the
other version or not it is a fine piece of film making.
