Title
Review for Handmaid's Tale, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  THE HANDMAID'S TALE preaches to the
     choir in a rather formulaic look at a dismal possible (if
     unlikely) future where women have no rights.  Robert Duvall's
     worst performance in memory highlights one of the less
     convincing arguments for feminism.  Rating: low 0.
     Back in the 1960s there were a number of science fiction films about
horrible repressive futures.  These films got their vision of the future by
a fairly simple turn-the-crank formula: pick a current hot concern; imagine
a society in which nobody or almost nobody has this concern.  Now what will
society be like with nobody worried about this issue?  Pretty ugly, right?
These films were all pretty much logical descendents of Orwell's novel 1984,
but that did it back when it was still original.  Films along these lines
include SOYLENT GREEN, Z.P.G., FAHRENHEIT 451, and THE LAST CHILD, and I
would also include SILENT RUNNING.  Eventually the public started finding
these exaggerated dystopic futures too dreary, so the ones without much
action died out and the ones with more action became mindless films such as
THE LAST CHASE and finally MAD MAX.  As a literary style it did not go away
and the occasional dystopic film like BRAZIL was still made on slightly more
abstract issues such as bureaucracy.  This year the dystopic science fiction
film is represented by THE HANDMAID'S TALE, about a future brought about by
apathy to feminist issues.
     It has been said that repressive views towards women see them as
madonnas or whores.  In this film, each woman is forced into the roles of
whore, servant, or madonna, wearing uniforms of red, white, or blue,
respectively.  99% of the women were left infertile after the plague.  If
they can afford it, these women become the madonnas; if not, they are
servants.  Those who are fertile become the handmaids.  Their job is to be
surrogate childbearers for the madonnas.  The process by which they come to
bear children starts by sending them to indoctrination centers which use
Orwellian mind control techniques, but which seem to be curiously
ineffective at winning hearts and minds.  From there they are farmed out to
homes where first they are ritually read the Biblical story of infertile
Rachel getting a child with the help of a handmaid.  After that, they are
impregnated in a curious ritual involved lying between the legs of one of
the madonnas while her husband does the dirty deed.
     The film opens with Kate (played by Natasha Richardson), her husband,
and her daughter trying to flee across the border.  Her husband is killed
and she does not know what happened to her daughter.  After the first shock,
all this she takes with a calm regret.  This means that between Margaret
Atwood's book and Harold Pinter's screenplay somebody did not know how
humans behave.  The film follows Kate through her indoctrination into the
society of handmaids and her assignment to the household of callous, selfish
evangelist Serena Joy (played by Faye Dunaway) and her flat, cardboard
husband, the Commander.  This role is quite a departure for Robert Duvall,
who usually acts in his films.  The only film that Duvall was in but
contributed less to was INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS.  To director Volker
Schlondorff does the dubious honor of being the only director ever to wring
an uninteresting performance from Duvall.
     While the film was colorful, with lots of costumes, in many ways the
production values were poor.  In a scene where the main character is holding
yarn, she has two strands when seen from the front and at least six seen an
instant later from the back.  Also at one point a woman gives birth to a
surprisingly clean six-month-old baby.  And speaking of such scenes, for a
film taking a stand against the exploitation of women, this film has more
than its share of half-naked and scantily clad women  and most of the nudity
is gratuitous.
     Director Schlondorff used to direct ABC "After-School Specials" and his
style does not seem to have gotten any more subtle.  I rate this film a low
0 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Unless you embrace any film on a feminist theme, I
do not recommend THE HANDMAID'S TALE.
