Title
Review for Caught (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Edward James Olmos, Maria Conchita Alonso, Arie Verveen, 
      Bitty Schram, Steven Schub
Director: Robert M. Young
Producer: Richard Brick, Irwin Young
Screenplay: Edward Pomerantz based on his novel, INTO IT
Cinematography: Michael Barrow
Music: Chris Botti
     Because it lacks a precise ideological agenda, CAUGHT is something 
of a departure for veteran director Robert M. Young (NOTHING BUT A 
MAN..., DOMINICK AND EUGENE, SHORT EYES), a film maker known for 
socially and politically-motivated dramas.  In fact, this is little more 
than an erotic, contemporary tale that plays like a Greek tragedy 
(OEDIPUS, to be exact).  CAUGHT crossections a dysfunctional family 
whose uncomfortable stability is disturbed by the introduction of an 
outsider.
     That outsider is Nick (Arie Verveen), a homeless Irish drifter 
trying to survive on the streets of Jersey City.  Luck is with Nick, for 
when he ducks into a fish store to escape the police, the owners, Joe 
(Edward James Olmos) and his wife, Betty (Maria Conchita Alonso), take 
pity on him.  They offer him a room, board, and $80 a week to work as 
Joe's assistant.  Nick accepts, not intending to stay for long.  But 
days turn into weeks, then months, and, soon, the young Irishman is more 
dear to Joe and Betty than their real son, Danny (Steven Schub), a 
failed standup comic who lives in Los Angeles.  
     Nick treats Joe like the father he never knew, but his feelings for 
Betty are more complex.  Although he regards her as a mother at the 
outset, he is powerless to stop a growing attraction.  Eventually, after 
one-too-many moments of hightened sexual awareness, their relationship 
is consummated.  From that point on, Nick and Betty are all over each 
other at every opportunity.  A further complication arises when Danny 
returns home with a wife and son to find that his place has been 
usurped.
     CAUGHT examines psychological and emotional family bonds as they 
apply to the "real" son and the "adopted" one.  The film also explores 
the most intense kind of sibling rivalry, a jealousy that is rooted in 
Oedipal impulses.  Danny has many reasons to hate Nick, but he doesn't 
go over the edge until he recognizes the sexual nature of Nick and 
Betty's relationship.  
     The final scenes close the story in an unforgettably stark manner.  
Although a relentless premonition of doom hangs over this picture, we're 
still not quite prepared for the brutal twist of events that marks 
CAUGHT's climax.  Even though the movie's overall arc is somewhat 
predictable, and occasionally melodramatic, it's impossible to deny the 
cumulative impact.  
     CAUGHT contains isolated moments of visual poetry that accomplish 
for fish displays what EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN did for food preparation.  
Joe teaches Nick the tricks of boning shad and placing snapper on ice in 
a manner that offers the greatest customer appeal.  In his words, "it's 
a gimmick -- a gimmick and an art."  Joe loves selling fish -- for him, 
it's more of a passion than a profession, and Nick's enthusiasm for it 
forms the basis of their relationship.
     Edward James Olmos and Maria Conchita Alonso, both of whom worked 
with Young in ROOSTERS, are in fine form.  Alonso radiates sexuality, 
and many of her scenes with newcomer Arie Verveen smolder, even when the 
two are fully clothed.  Steven Schub occasionally overplays his 
bitterness, but, in general, his portrayal of Danny is a study of grief 
and anger born through personal and professional failure.  
     CAUGHT opens and closes with an image of fish caught in a net, 
struggling to escape.  It's an apt metaphor, since all the characters in 
this film are trapped by fate in one way or another.  Due primarily to 
its dark, unsettling tone, CAUGHT has yet to capture a distributor.  
Hopefully, this is only a temporary condition, because thought-provoking 
tragedy like this deserves a place in American cinema.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CAUGHT is a powerful character study and devastating love
triangle.  Although the title of the picture is an obvious giveaway for
the ending, it doesn't matter.  This is no mystery; the revelations are
of the spirit and not of some artificial turn of an overly clever
suspense plot.
     Filmed in a tough area of Jersey City, CAUGHT is the cautionary
tale of two people who invite a stranger into their lives and thereby
transform their lives forever.  Simple and hard working Joe (Edward
James Olmos) is the owner of Joe's fish store.  He brags that he was
once known as "the fastest knife in the West" for his deboning skills.
He is still so confident that he will give any customer who finds a
bone in his fish, "their money back plus a quarter."
     His wife Betty (Maria Conchita Alonso), who answer's the phone as
"Mrs. Joe," is proud of her husband.  She says, "Fish are his life."
But he puts it more succinctly, "Fish been very, very good to me."
Although happy, she has aspirations, "I want to go places."  In part
put-down and part realism, he retorts, "You want to go places?  Get up
at 5:00AM, I'll take you to Fulton's Fish Market."
     Into their busy and unassuming life, comes a young man in his
twenties named Nick (Arie Verveen).  He is about the same age as their
son Danny (Steve Schub) who has gone to Hollywood to seek his fortune
as a standup comedian.  When Nick arrives out of breath and starving at
their shop, they invite him to stay at their house, and they soon give
him a job as well.   Yes, this is a show that strains credulity every
now and then, but the emotions are real and the scenes so natural you
will have no problem suspending disbelief.
     The unglamorous cinematography by Michael F. Barrow is as
carefully constructed and important as the antonymic lush work of John
Toll in LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  Look how shiny the grease reflects off of
Nick's chin at dinner making him look especially crude.  Every line in
Betty's naked body is highlighted when she makes love to remind us of
her age.  As Joe is cutting fish, his facials pours seem like they will
erupt at any moment.  These people look more like inhabitants of a
documentary than a fictional romance.  Barrow loves close-ups and
editor Norman Buckley combines them into dizzyingly fast sequences that
keeps the pacing and the energy high.
     Soon their small apartment is brimming with sexual tension.  Betty
wants more out of her life, but her husband is content with the
challenges of running an inner city fish store.  She looks sadly in the
mirror at her aging body.  Quiet Nick becomes Joe's second son, but
Nick's hormones are raging, and he admires his young body which
explodes with its sexuality.
     As the title suggests, Betty and Nick are soon doing it all the
time and in every locale possible.  Amazingly, in a tiny apartment with
thin walls, they never seem to wake up Nick.
     The tension ratchets up even more when Danny, his wife Amy (Bitty
Schram), and their young son Peter arrive home at a very inauspicious
moment.  Steve Schub is great as an obnoxious son who claims that stars
are fighting to have him on their show, but right now, of course, he is
a little hard pressed for cash.  Schub has this evil look that makes
his every statement seem to have deep hidden portent.
     All of the performances are quite good, but Maria Conchita Alonso
owns every scene she is in.  She gives a beautiful and insightful
performance of a woman who loves her husband, but doesn't want to let
go of her sexuality.  Nick is so available and so handsome, that it is
hard to do anything but make love to him.  Yes, it is wrong, but like
the bottle and the alcoholic, they are drawn to each other.
     The ending is much more impressive and complicated that the
straightforward title suggestions.  It is the best part of the film,
and I liked it all except the way the conflict between Nick and Danny
is resolved.
     Masterfully directed by Robert M. Young (DOMINICK AND EUGENE and
TRIUMPH OF THE SPIRIT) and with a well developed screenplay by Edward
Pomerantz (based on his book "Into It"), CAUGHT is an entrancing film
with sympathetic characters that keeps you glued to the screen.  The
script saves the best for last without ever cheating the audience along
the way.  Sometimes devastating, periodically erotic, always smartly
written and acted, and frequently tender, CAUGHT is a cornucopia of
emotions.  If you go, it will catch you in its spell.
     CAUGHT runs 1:59 but doesn't seem near that long.  It is rated R
for one dope smoking scene, lots of sex of many varieties, nudity, some
violence, and bad language.  It would be okay for mature teenagers
only.  For adults, I recommend it and give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CAUGHT is a powerful character study and devastating love
triangle.  Although the title of the picture is an obvious giveaway for
the ending, it doesn't matter.  This is no mystery; the revelations are
of the spirit and not of some artificial turn of an overly clever
suspense plot.
     Filmed in a tough area of Jersey City, CAUGHT is the cautionary
tale of two people who invite a stranger into their lives and thereby
transform their lives forever.  Simple and hard working Joe (Edward
James Olmos) is the owner of Joe's fish store.  He brags that he was
once known as "the fastest knife in the West" for his deboning skills.
He is still so confident that he will give any customer who finds a
bone in his fish, "their money back plus a quarter."
     His wife Betty (Maria Conchita Alonso), who answer's the phone as
"Mrs. Joe," is proud of her husband.  She says, "Fish are his life."
But he puts it more succinctly, "Fish been very, very good to me."
Although happy, she has aspirations, "I want to go places."  In part
put-down and part realism, he retorts, "You want to go places?  Get up
at 5:00AM, I'll take you to Fulton's Fish Market."
     Into their busy and unassuming life, comes a young man in his
twenties named Nick (Arie Verveen).  He is about the same age as their
son Danny (Steve Schub) who has gone to Hollywood to seek his fortune
as a standup comedian.  When Nick arrives out of breath and starving at
their shop, they invite him to stay at their house, and they soon give
him a job as well.   Yes, this is a show that strains credulity every
now and then, but the emotions are real and the scenes so natural you
will have no problem suspending disbelief.
     The unglamorous cinematography by Michael F. Barrow is as
carefully constructed and important as the antonymic lush work of John
Toll in LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  Look how shiny the grease reflects off of
Nick's chin at dinner making him look especially crude.  Every line in
Betty's naked body is highlighted when she makes love to remind us of
her age.  As Joe is cutting fish, his facials pours seem like they will
erupt at any moment.  These people look more like inhabitants of a
documentary than a fictional romance.  Barrow loves close-ups and
editor Norman Buckley combines them into dizzyingly fast sequences that
keeps the pacing and the energy high.
     Soon their small apartment is brimming with sexual tension.  Betty
wants more out of her life, but her husband is content with the
challenges of running an inner city fish store.  She looks sadly in the
mirror at her aging body.  Quiet Nick becomes Joe's second son, but
Nick's hormones are raging, and he admires his young body which
explodes with its sexuality.
     As the title suggests, Betty and Nick are soon doing it all the
time and in every locale possible.  Amazingly, in a tiny apartment with
thin walls, they never seem to wake up Nick.
     The tension ratchets up even more when Danny, his wife Amy (Bitty
Schram), and their young son Peter arrive home at a very inauspicious
moment.  Steve Schub is great as an obnoxious son who claims that stars
are fighting to have him on their show, but right now, of course, he is
a little hard pressed for cash.  Schub has this evil look that makes
his every statement seem to have deep hidden portent.
     All of the performances are quite good, but Maria Conchita Alonso
owns every scene she is in.  She gives a beautiful and insightful
performance of a woman who loves her husband, but doesn't want to let
go of her sexuality.  Nick is so available and so handsome, that it is
hard to do anything but make love to him.  Yes, it is wrong, but like
the bottle and the alcoholic, they are drawn to each other.
     The ending is much more impressive and complicated that the
straightforward title suggestions.  It is the best part of the film,
and I liked it all except the way the conflict between Nick and Danny
is resolved.
     Masterfully directed by Robert M. Young (DOMINICK AND EUGENE and
TRIUMPH OF THE SPIRIT) and with a well developed screenplay by Edward
Pomerantz (based on his book "Into It"), CAUGHT is an entrancing film
with sympathetic characters that keeps you glued to the screen.  The
script saves the best for last without ever cheating the audience along
the way.  Sometimes devastating, periodically erotic, always smartly
written and acted, and frequently tender, CAUGHT is a cornucopia of
emotions.  If you go, it will catch you in its spell.
     CAUGHT runs 1:59 but doesn't seem near that long.  It is rated R
for one dope smoking scene, lots of sex of many varieties, nudity, some
violence, and bad language.  It would be okay for mature teenagers
only.  For adults, I recommend it and give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CAUGHT is a powerful character study and devastating love
triangle.  Although the title of the picture is an obvious giveaway for
the ending, it doesn't matter.  This is no mystery; the revelations are
of the spirit and not of some artificial turn of an overly clever
suspense plot.
     Filmed in a tough area of Jersey City, CAUGHT is the cautionary
tale of two people who invite a stranger into their lives and thereby
transform their lives forever.  Simple and hard working Joe (Edward
James Olmos) is the owner of Joe's fish store.  He brags that he was
once known as "the fastest knife in the West" for his deboning skills.
He is still so confident that he will give any customer who finds a
bone in his fish, "their money back plus a quarter."
     His wife Betty (Maria Conchita Alonso), who answer's the phone as
"Mrs. Joe," is proud of her husband.  She says, "Fish are his life."
But he puts it more succinctly, "Fish been very, very good to me."
Although happy, she has aspirations, "I want to go places."  In part
put-down and part realism, he retorts, "You want to go places?  Get up
at 5:00AM, I'll take you to Fulton's Fish Market."
     Into their busy and unassuming life, comes a young man in his
twenties named Nick (Arie Verveen).  He is about the same age as their
son Danny (Steve Schub) who has gone to Hollywood to seek his fortune
as a standup comedian.  When Nick arrives out of breath and starving at
their shop, they invite him to stay at their house, and they soon give
him a job as well.   Yes, this is a show that strains credulity every
now and then, but the emotions are real and the scenes so natural you
will have no problem suspending disbelief.
     The unglamorous cinematography by Michael F. Barrow is as
carefully constructed and important as the antonymic lush work of John
Toll in LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  Look how shiny the grease reflects off of
Nick's chin at dinner making him look especially crude.  Every line in
Betty's naked body is highlighted when she makes love to remind us of
her age.  As Joe is cutting fish, his facials pours seem like they will
erupt at any moment.  These people look more like inhabitants of a
documentary than a fictional romance.  Barrow loves close-ups and
editor Norman Buckley combines them into dizzyingly fast sequences that
keeps the pacing and the energy high.
     Soon their small apartment is brimming with sexual tension.  Betty
wants more out of her life, but her husband is content with the
challenges of running an inner city fish store.  She looks sadly in the
mirror at her aging body.  Quiet Nick becomes Joe's second son, but
Nick's hormones are raging, and he admires his young body which
explodes with its sexuality.
     As the title suggests, Betty and Nick are soon doing it all the
time and in every locale possible.  Amazingly, in a tiny apartment with
thin walls, they never seem to wake up Nick.
     The tension ratchets up even more when Danny, his wife Amy (Bitty
Schram), and their young son Peter arrive home at a very inauspicious
moment.  Steve Schub is great as an obnoxious son who claims that stars
are fighting to have him on their show, but right now, of course, he is
a little hard pressed for cash.  Schub has this evil look that makes
his every statement seem to have deep hidden portent.
     All of the performances are quite good, but Maria Conchita Alonso
owns every scene she is in.  She gives a beautiful and insightful
performance of a woman who loves her husband, but doesn't want to let
go of her sexuality.  Nick is so available and so handsome, that it is
hard to do anything but make love to him.  Yes, it is wrong, but like
the bottle and the alcoholic, they are drawn to each other.
     The ending is much more impressive and complicated that the
straightforward title suggestions.  It is the best part of the film,
and I liked it all except the way the conflict between Nick and Danny
is resolved.
     Masterfully directed by Robert M. Young (DOMINICK AND EUGENE and
TRIUMPH OF THE SPIRIT) and with a well developed screenplay by Edward
Pomerantz (based on his book "Into It"), CAUGHT is an entrancing film
with sympathetic characters that keeps you glued to the screen.  The
script saves the best for last without ever cheating the audience along
the way.  Sometimes devastating, periodically erotic, always smartly
written and acted, and frequently tender, CAUGHT is a cornucopia of
emotions.  If you go, it will catch you in its spell.
     CAUGHT runs 1:59 but doesn't seem near that long.  It is rated R
for one dope smoking scene, lots of sex of many varieties, nudity, some
violence, and bad language.  It would be okay for mature teenagers
only.  For adults, I recommend it and give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 30, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
