Title
Review for Oh, God! Book II (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
LooseSkrue@aol.com
In 1977, a light hearted comedy about God was released with a not too
ambiguous title: OH, GOD! It starred John Denver and George Burns, both of
whom are now dead (meaning Burns is just a tad closer to his role than he was
over twenty years ago). It spawned two sequels, the first of which followed
the original's premise to a great extent - God comes down to Earth to initiate
a spokesperson of sorts, all the while causing an uproar over this person's
highly unbelievable testimony. Perhaps as a motive to attract a swarm of
movie-goers to the film, OH, GOD! BOOK II made the spokesperson into an
11-year-old girl, capable of warming hearts with her innocent smile. Nice
touch - if the story couldn't captivate audiences a second time around, maybe
an adorable little girl could.
The girl in question is Tracy (played by uniname actress, Louanne), the child
of divorced parents still holding grudges toward one another. At a Chinese
restaurant on her weekly night out with dad, Tracy makes an innocent passing
comment about having faith in God, and before she knows it, her fortune
cookies are a bit too personalized. It seems God (played again by George
Burns) liked young Tracy's insight, and via the fortune cookies, He instructs
her to meet Him in the lounge. It takes a bit of convincing (i.e. doors
opening and closing by themselves) to assure Tracy this isn't just a hoax, but
when God finally has her full attention, He tells her the reason behind this
personal revelation: He wants Tracy to come up with a slogan to remind people
that He's still out there. After all, the world definitely could give the Big
Guy some overly due recognition. Thus, in a blaze of confused astonishment,
Tracy agrees to try and come up with something over the next week (and agrees
not to cheat by passing the task on to her advertising agent of a father).
Enlisting the aid of a pre-teen is a smart move, especially when adults seem
way too busy and out of touch to really hone in on such an important task. Of
course, who's going to turn down a guy who has the ability to shove a
lightning bolt up your wazoo? As stated above in simpler terms, the
spokesperson (Tracy) will deliver God's message (the slogan "Think God") and
cause a big hoopla as people begin deeming him/her crazy (parents, teachers,
shrinks, etc.). When Tracy gets all the kids in her school to participate in a
"promote God" campaign (more or less), parents and faculty complain. Yes, even
in the conservative world of 1980, public school is not to be used as a
religious pulpit. Psychologists blame the "hallucinations" on the parent's
divorce, the parents question each other, and although it's not shown, I'm
sure someone blames it on a bad plate of sushi.
OH, GOD! BOOK II hasn't aged as gracefully as George Burns (not that I've seen
him in the last couple of years), but it's still not a bad film by any means.
Still suffering from the anguishable 1970's, 1980 isn't all that pleasant to
look at, but nonetheless offers an overly sweet tale of a little girl's
struggle to do what's right. That's putting it even more impressively than it
really is, but at least it's an innocent film that families can enjoy together
without a barrage of mindless vulgar comments. Yes, the color brown dominates
every frame and the only contrast seems to be dark rouge plastered in thick
smudges across Suzanne Pleshette's cheeks, but the story outlasts the
horrendous fashions. The legitimate complaint should be about the film's
pacing, which is a bit tedious from today's standards. There are way too many
stops and starts that seem due more to it's time than to unprofessional film-
making. These lulls could easily lead to distraction, but with a bit more
effort than today's movies require, you can keep yourself focused.
Next time you head to the video store, you'll likely find tons of choices that
far exceed this film. Fair or not, older films, save it be classics (which
this clearly is not), just don't have the appeal of an even more lame but
fairly recent movie. As awful as it is, you'll probably pick up THE PEST from
the new release wall before you decide to mosey over into the "old" movies and
pick this one up. True, this isn't so recommendable that I urge you to seek it
out, but it is an O.K. alternate when all those new releases are checked out.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
In 1977, a light hearted comedy about God was released with a not too
ambiguous title: OH, GOD! It starred John Denver and George Burns, both of
whom are now dead (meaning Burns is just a tad closer to his role than he was
over twenty years ago). It spawned two sequels, the first of which followed
the original's premise to a great extent - God comes down to Earth to initiate
a spokesperson of sorts, all the while causing an uproar over this person's
highly unbelievable testimony. Perhaps as a motive to attract a swarm of
movie-goers to the film, OH, GOD! BOOK II made the spokesperson into an
11-year-old girl, capable of warming hearts with her innocent smile. Nice
touch - if the story couldn't captivate audiences a second time around, maybe
an adorable little girl could.
The girl in question is Tracy (played by uniname actress, Louanne), the child
of divorced parents still holding grudges toward one another. At a Chinese
restaurant on her weekly night out with dad, Tracy makes an innocent passing
comment about having faith in God, and before she knows it, her fortune
cookies are a bit too personalized. It seems God (played again by George
Burns) liked young Tracy's insight, and via the fortune cookies, He instructs
her to meet Him in the lounge. It takes a bit of convincing (i.e. doors
opening and closing by themselves) to assure Tracy this isn't just a hoax, but
when God finally has her full attention, He tells her the reason behind this
personal revelation: He wants Tracy to come up with a slogan to remind people
that He's still out there. After all, the world definitely could give the Big
Guy some overly due recognition. Thus, in a blaze of confused astonishment,
Tracy agrees to try and come up with something over the next week (and agrees
not to cheat by passing the task on to her advertising agent of a father).
Enlisting the aid of a pre-teen is a smart move, especially when adults seem
way too busy and out of touch to really hone in on such an important task. Of
course, who's going to turn down a guy who has the ability to shove a
lightning bolt up your wazoo? As stated above in simpler terms, the
spokesperson (Tracy) will deliver God's message (the slogan "Think God") and
cause a big hoopla as people begin deeming him/her crazy (parents, teachers,
shrinks, etc.). When Tracy gets all the kids in her school to participate in a
"promote God" campaign (more or less), parents and faculty complain. Yes, even
in the conservative world of 1980, public school is not to be used as a
religious pulpit. Psychologists blame the "hallucinations" on the parent's
divorce, the parents question each other, and although it's not shown, I'm
sure someone blames it on a bad plate of sushi.
OH, GOD! BOOK II hasn't aged as gracefully as George Burns (not that I've seen
him in the last couple of years), but it's still not a bad film by any means.
Still suffering from the anguishable 1970's, 1980 isn't all that pleasant to
look at, but nonetheless offers an overly sweet tale of a little girl's
struggle to do what's right. That's putting it even more impressively than it
really is, but at least it's an innocent film that families can enjoy together
without a barrage of mindless vulgar comments. Yes, the color brown dominates
every frame and the only contrast seems to be dark rouge plastered in thick
smudges across Suzanne Pleshette's cheeks, but the story outlasts the
horrendous fashions. The legitimate complaint should be about the film's
pacing, which is a bit tedious from today's standards. There are way too many
stops and starts that seem due more to it's time than to unprofessional film-
making. These lulls could easily lead to distraction, but with a bit more
effort than today's movies require, you can keep yourself focused.
Next time you head to the video store, you'll likely find tons of choices that
far exceed this film. Fair or not, older films, save it be classics (which
this clearly is not), just don't have the appeal of an even more lame but
fairly recent movie. As awful as it is, you'll probably pick up THE PEST from
the new release wall before you decide to mosey over into the "old" movies and
pick this one up. True, this isn't so recommendable that I urge you to seek it
out, but it is an O.K. alternate when all those new releases are checked out.
