Title
Review for Sazaye Maut (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Amin Meghani
     What starts out as a promising engineering job opportunity soon
turns into a horrible nightmare for Omkaar (Naseer); in the space of a
few terrible minutes, he is sucked into a vortex of events that
culminate in his being accused of murder and sentenced to death.  And
this is where our story begins. (Have I caught your interest now?) On
death row, Omkaar finally seems resigned to this cruel twist of fate
when a high-priced attorney mysteriously appears to appeal his case.
Omkaar is proved insane and the court orders him locked up in an
asylum.  There, he is offered a bargain to regain his freedom.  Realizing
by now that he is merely a pawn intentionally trapped in the web of a
sinister conspiracy, Omkaar acquiesces to the deal.
     Vidhu Chopra's debut movie is as a multi-carat gem on a revolving
display in a fancy, well-lighted jewelry store: no matter how you look
at it, it dazzles you with its sparkling brilliance, not occasionally
but continuously, leaving you slightly dazed at the end, but wanting
more.  From the opening frame (which by its very ordinariness, aided by
some nifty background sets, is made extraordinary) to the closing
credits; from the menacing steel and concrete jungle of Bombay to the
breathtaking beauty of the countryside to the deceptive serenity of
Goa, Chopra holds, make that commands, our attention.  The script is
intelligent and well-crafted:  VVC and team have ensured the conspiracy
is no hokey 'saazish' that often gives indigestion to yours truly, but
a genuine, no-way-out jaal that begs for recognition independent of the
movie's human stars as it attempts to swallow our hero.
     Talking about our hero, m'man Naseer is fully up to the task and
in top form (as he always is).  His Omkaar is well-scripted for sure,
but Naseer truly brings him to life, imbuing him with an evolving
ability to adapt to his rapidly changing circumstances born out of a
desperate struggle for survival.  This low-key metamorphosis is a
marvel to watch and we have only Naseer to thank for this all-too-rare
acting treat.
     This is a riveting movie; as the end credits roll, and we slowly
come out of the trance Chopra has put us under for two hours, we know
we have seen a master craftsman make an impressive debut.  Is this just
a flash in the pan, or will he indeed climb to new heights with his
subsequent projects? Will he go far is the question.  Having the
benefit of hindsight, we smile a secret little smile and whisper,
"Khamosh, Parinda, 1942.  Does that answer your question?"  You bet.
