Title
Review for Flashfire (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In modern society law enforcement ceased to be exclusive
domain of certain distinct social groups and policemen now
come from all walks of life. FLASHFIRE, 1993 thriller
directed by Elliott Silverstein, represents this phenomenon
in the form of its protagonist. Jack Flinder (played by
Billy Zane) is policeman who came from the rich family and
later became despised by his financially less fortunate
colleagues. They hate him because he lacked motivation to
take bribes and later actually testified against fellow cop
during corruption trial. Real ordeal begins when his partner
gets killed by two assassins in motel during the encounter
with Lisa Cates (played by Kristin Minter). The girl managed
to escape without harm and therefore became witness. Flinder
wants to find people responsible for his partner's death and
decides to protect the prostitute, falling in love with her
in process. Soon it becomes clear that the assassins were
actually policemen and that the motive for murder was
actually cover- up of corruption scandal.
Exploitation cinema in last few decades embraced police
corruption as part of its most favoured motives. Naturally,
1990s B-films like FLASHFIRE can't be made without combining
this motive with other forms of sleaze. But FLASHFIRE
nevertheless fails to arouse our interest because
scriptwriters John Warren and Dan York drown the story with
cliches and predictability while director Silverstein gives
anaemic look to the plot and characters. FLASHFIRE simply
can't be rescued from the well-deserved descent into
oblivion - not even by the presence of always capable Louis
Gossett Jr. in thankless role of police captain nor by
physically attractive but nevertheless not very interesting
Kristin Minter in the role of femme fatale.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
