Title
Review for Jury Duty (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     When Alexander Pope, way back in the early 18th Century, used the
expression "Hope springs eternal in the human breast" he may have had
in mind Pauly Shore.  Why anyone (in this case TriStar) would want to
make a film starring Mr. Shore is a mystery.  Of all the inane films I
see each year, Jury Duty ranks at the top.  I use the word "rank"
advisedly.
     The screenplay writers (Neil Tolkin, Barbara Williams and Samantha
Adams) attempt to show the craziness currently involved in the hysteria
of people who follow trials such as that of the O J Simpson, Heidi
Fleiss and the Menendez brothers.  It purports to show the media
madness as well.  Unfortunately the film misses its mark by a long
shot.
     Tommy (Pauly Short) is unemployed and unemployable when he
receives a notice to report for jury duty.  At the urging of his mother
(Shelley Winters in a cameo role) he accepts.  Before we know it he is
on the jury in a murder trial and is voted jury foreman.  Tommy, unlike
the other jurors, is sequestered in a very posh hotel which fact makes
him unwilling to have the trial end and have him sent back to his
poverty home.  So, despite eleven jurors favoring a verdict of "Guilty,"
Tommy refuses to go along; he is not going to give up his free soap and
hair shampoo that readily.
     There is more but I will forbear.  Let us just say that the
writers, the director (John Fortenberry) and sundry producers should be
arrested before being allowed to make another film.
     Abe Vigoda has the role of the judge.  Beautiful Tia Carrere is
one of the jurors.
