Title
Review for Spotswood (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

EFFICIENCY EXPERT, THE (Spotswood) (director: Mark Joffe; screenwriters:
Max Dann/Andrew Knight; cinematographer: Ellery Ryan; editor: Nicholas
Beauman; cast: Anthony Hopkins (Wallace), Ben Mendelsohn (Carey), Toni
Collette (Wendy), Bruno Lawrence (Robert), Alwyn Kurts (Mr. Ball),
Rebecca Rigg (Cheryl), Angela Punch-McGregor (Caroline), John Walton
(JerryFinn), Russell Crowe (Kim); Runtime: 95; 1991-Australia)
This is a minor comedy, in the style of Ealing films from the 1950s, set
in the 1960s in a suburban Australian town called Spotswood. It is about
a cold, calculating efficiency expert, Errol Wallace (Hopkins), who has
a change of heart after evaluating an old-fashioned, family-owned
moccasin factory, and he comes to realize that not everything could be
measured by the bottom line. The film makes a point to show how Hopkin's
personal life is drab and his marriage is coming apart, yet he tells
others how to manage their lives. This film has a gentle way of showing
the war between the bureaucrats of big business and the little man
caught in the squeeze of downsizing for greater company profits. Anthony
Hopkins offers a restraint performance that borders on brilliance,
showing that he really cares that he had to fire workers in the face of
business competition and foreign pressure. How effective the film was,
depended on how much you thought Hopkin's change mattered. I only felt I
was seeing a Frank Capra type of social-issue picture, that only goes
surface deep, accenting how wonderful and eccentric the little guy is
and how cold-hearted are the corporation types, resulting in too many
generalizations of each type.
The small shoe company has been in business for a long time, but it
expects to run out of money in about 18 months. The owner is Mr. Ball
(Alwyn Kurts), one of those old-timers who really cares about the people
who work for him and forms a paternalistic relationship with his loyal
employees. But the place has not kept up with the modern times and is in
need of a shot in the arm. Wallace says it reminds him of a visit to his
grandfather's house.
Wallace gets his stopwatch out, gets a look at the poorly kept books,
and laissez-faire worker's attitude, and takes the foreman's teenage
son, Carey (Ben Mendelsohn), and has him record the worker's efficiency
on the job. Carey only helps Wallace do this because the boss'
attractive daughter, Cheryl (Rigg), will be working with him in the
office and he wants to get close to her so that he can ask her out. But
a young cocky upstart in the sales department, Kim (Crowe), who has a
different attitude than the others who work there, thinking only of
himself, gets to Cheryl first. The film will keep track of how the
likable but goofy Carey does in the romance department. Since it is
obvious that he is not Cheryl's type, and is too immature to realize how
lucky he is to have a kindhearted girl who works in the dispatch
department, Wendy (Toni Collette), show a love interest in him. He will
futilely chase after Cheryl for most of the film.
Meanwhile, on Wallace's last efficiency assignment at a big auto plant,
he recommended huge layoffs, which has sparked union unrest and he finds
himself in the midst of settling that crisis while continuing to examine
this much friendlier plant, but fully realizing that he will have to
recommend firing most of the workers here also, including Carey's father
(Bruno Lawrence).
Wallace tries to be distant to the workers, but in their naiveness of
what his real job is, thinking he is there to modernize the plant, the
workers go out of their way to be friendly to him. The culmination of
this comraderie, is when they invite him to join their team in slot car
races for the state championship. So when it comes time to announce that
the firm is firing them, he comes up with a new solution, making them
partners in the plant and having the plant expand into manufacturing
gloves and seat covers to take the place of the slow sales in moccasins,
thereby saving their jobs. This happy ending seemed artificial...too
much pablum to confront the real problems still facing the workers in an
economy driven by stock market expectations.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Å  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Frank Maloney
     SPOTSWOOD is an Australian film directed by Mark Joffee, from a
screenplay by Max Dann and Andrew Knight and based on their novel.  It
stars Anthony Hopkins, Ben Mendelsohn, Rebecca Rigg, Toni Collette,
Alwyn Kurts, and Russell Crowe.  Rated PG for mature humor.
     SPOTSWOOD is a modest, small film with a lazy pace and one of the
most acclaimed film actors of this decade, Anthony Hopkins.  More
importantly for me, it also featured a fresh cast of characters,
especially the endearingly awkward Ben Mendelsohn and the plain and
beautifully strong Toni Collette.  This film will remind you of a number
of others, LOCAL HERO being the most obvious.  It begins like one of
those whimsical comedies of postwar Britain that celebrated eccentricity
and working-class virtues, this time with a lot of daffy people at a
moccasin factory, schlepping around in fuzzy bedroom slippers and
quilted bathrobes, a factory where the real product is a tight little
family of happy people.  Hopkins enters this fool's paradise (it is
going broke, after all) like a serpent to help the owner save the
business by destroying it, cutting out manufacturing, trimming the
staff, and introducing capitalist discipline.
     The opening sequence, as Hopkins and the audience explore the Balls
Moccasin factory for first time and get our first incredulous ganders at
its loony inmates, is very funny, very charming, and tightly paced.  And
then director Mark Joffee abruptly pulls the plug on his own momentum.
The movie continues in this uneven way to its inevitable end.
Certainly, the story holds no surprises, and the point of the film is
the characters; we do learn to care about them and to see past their
eccentricities.  We also learn to dislike one or two of them, the ones
who will never learn from this cast of industrial no-shows.  Hopkins'
character, Wallace, of course, is not amongst the short list of true and
lasting bad-uns, and we and he have a wonderful 1/24th-scale slot-car
racing sequence to thank for that.
     Hopkins is a fair treat.  He is more like the Hopkins of 84 CHARING
CROSS ROAD than either Hannibal Lecter or Henry Wilcox of HOWARDS END,
but then there's this little eye tic, this one chilly sentence, or the
briefest return of a disused smile that are texts on art of small
gestures and great acting.
     By the way, Russell Crowe was last seen in the U.S. in the
Australian film PROOF, this time playing quite a different sort of
character.  However, whereas PROOF came as close to being a perfect film
as I've seen in a long while, SPOTSWOOD is far from perfect.  It is
sweet, good natured, well intended, and entertaining; what it lacks is
sustained energy.
     I can recommend SPOTSWOOD, but not at full price.  It is receiving
a somewhat wider release than a small film from Oz would normally be
accorded thanks to the box-office power of Hopkins.
