Title
Review for Safe House (1999/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
           Quite often, particularly this time of year, the best new
"movies" are those made-for-TV, and this character-driven
action-adventure is one of them. Patrick Stewart (Jean Luc-Picard of
"Star Trek: The Next Generation") plays Mace, a retired government
official, suffering from Alzheimer's disease, who believes a retired
Admiral, now a Presidential candidate, is trying to kill him because
he's the last remaining member of an elite, "dirty tricks, hit squad"
of the Pentagon. As a result of his suspicions, Mace has become a
paranoid recluse living in an impenetrable home in Los Angeles. To
protect himself, he's surrounded by the ultimate in state-of-the-art
weaponry and hi-tech surveillance equipment. And to keep himself
mentally and physically alert, he deliberately stages terrifying
"drills" with his poolman. Realizing that the keen mind of this
once-elegant and refined gentleman is deteriorating, his daughter
hires a perpetually perky, professional in-home caregiver (Kimberly
Williams) to look after her father and insists that he regularly visit
a psychiatrist (Hector Elizondo) who specializes in
gerontology. Initially resentful of the young woman, Mace slowly warms
to her but, when he mistakenly shoots at a neighbor's car, he realizes
that he's soon going to be "put away" in a locked-care facility. In a
race against time, Mace thinks he's prepared for what happens
next...but is he? Writer/director Eric Steven Stahl has concocted a
highly imaginative, edge-of-your-seat thriller. On the Granger
Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "Safe House" is a suspenseful 7. Don't miss
the premiere on Sunday night, January 24, at 8 PM on Showtime TV.
