Title
Review for Two if by Sea (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Denis Leary, Sandra Bullock, Stephen Dillane, Yaphet Kotto, 
      Wayne Robson
Director: Bill Bennett
Producer: James G. Robinson
Screenplay: Denis Leary & Mike Armstrong 
Cinematography: Andrew Lesnie
Music: Nick Glennie-Smith and Paddy Moloney
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     TWO IF BY SEA has all the earmarks of a direct-to-video release 
that got a theatrical detour on its way to the local Blockbuster -- due 
entirely, no doubt, to the presence of Sandra Bullock.  I'm not sure 
exactly when this project went before the cameras (probably pre-SPEED), 
but it was obviously before Bullock's star soared into its current, high 
orbit. There's no other explanation why she would appear in something 
this wretched.  It's easily her worst film to date (and that includes 
LOVE POTION #9).
     TWO IF BY SEA tells the story of a pair thieves on the run, but 
Frank (Denis Leary) and Roz (Bullock) are definitely no Bonnie and 
Clyde.  They're stupid, incompetent, and dangerous only to each other.  
Fortunately for them, the pursuing lawmen, led by Yaphet Kotto's 
O'Malley, show similar IQ levels.  In fact, everyone in this movie is 
irredeemably dumb -- but, considering the level at which the script was 
written, that comes as no surprise.  TWO IF BY SEA is insulting to 
anyone who unwittingly sacrificed money to watch it.
     Frank and Roz' latest caper is to steal a $4 million Matisse 
painting from a private collector.  While waiting to sell the booty, 
they break into a posh mansion and camp out there for a few days.  One 
of the neighbors, the handsome, refined Evan Marsh (Stephen Dillane), 
becomes enamored with Roz, and, anxious to get her into bed, offers her 
a taste of "the good life".  All this happens while her relationship 
with Frank is rapidly sliding downhill.  
     The probable goal of TWO IF BY SEA is to provide a humorous, 
bittersweet look at how lasting love changes lives.  But this movie 
isn't funny, touching, or romantic.  It's a tremendous bore that 
constantly challenges audience members to stay seated.  What's 
surprising is that co-writer Leary, who is a comedian, could come up 
with such a singularly unappealing, flat script.  If you laugh more than 
once during the ninety-five minute running length, you'll have my total 
beaten.  
     Sandra Bullock's star quality has saved commonplace movies like 
WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING and THE NET.  However, miscast and uttering 
lines from a horrendous screenplay, there's nothing she can do for TWO 
IF BY SEA.  She's not exactly bad, but her performance never transcends 
a certain level of mediocrity.  Worse still, she and Leary never 
connect.  There's no romantic spark, and it's hard to believe that their 
characters are (or have ever been) in love.  Then there are the so-
called "Boston" accents, which fade in and out, and sound exactly like 
someone not from Boston trying unsuccessfully to pretend that they are.
     TWO IF BY SEA has a drab, dreary tone that's due as much to the 
unenthusiastic performances as to the bland direction.  If anyone was 
having fun making this film, it doesn't come across.  STAR WARS' gold 
droid C3P0 had more humanity than all of TWO IF BY SEA's characters 
combined.  Because I never cared about Frank or Roz, the "feel good" 
ending left me cold.  And, to think, I wasted over an hour and a half in 
a theater with this movie when I could have been outside shoveling 
snow...

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Two stars if mediocre, that's a rule of mine in movie 
reviewing and boy oh boy does it apply here. I like Denis Leary--his 
supporting rols in DEMOLITION MAN and JUDGMENT NIGHT 
complemented what were already good movies--but when he tries to 
carry a movie himself, as in THE REF, the results are a little less than 
ideal. He can only keep up the complain-about-everything motif for so 
long before it gets stale, and in TWO IF BY SEA he doesn't even give 
us that. His character is more of a brainless jerk than just a jerk.
        And Sandra Bullock I like too, but I still think she wasn't cut 
out for romantic comedies. She does about as well here as in WHILE 
YOU WERE SLEEPING, only here she plays the Jersey Jew stereotype, 
a Rhoda for the 90's. The thing is, Bullock is just too sweet and 
appealing to pull off a brash, abrasive character like that. She's the 
victim of miscasting here, in a role I'd saw was originally intended for 
Marisa Tomei. Again I say, Sandra, stick to the action movies like 
SPEED and THE NET, or at least pick a _funny_ script when you want 
to do comedy.
        So, to recap, both of their characters are unsuited to their 
personalities. In addition, the idea of a Denis Leary-Sandra Bullock 
team-up in the first place isn't something nature ever intended. 
(What's next? Howard Stern and Kathie Lee Gifford?) The premise 
here has Leary as a small-time thief and Bullock as his lover. He's just 
stolen an antique painting and is trying to shake the cops. It opens 
with the traditional car chase and proceeds to a traditional train chase, 
before the two of them find a vacant island mansion to lay low in until 
their buyer shows up.
        Nothing original so far, and if you stick around for the rest of 
the movie, you'll see Leary try to get back to nature by going fishing 
(He ends up shooting the fish. Ha!), a cultured neighbor try to steal 
Bullock away from insensitive Leary and Leary act like a shot-fish-
out-of-water at the neighbor's cocktail party. All of these are second-
rate sitcom and movie cliches that are reworked here with nothing 
original or amusing to add.
        All the while, a group of the dumbest criminals you've ever 
seen and a detective are in the process of tracking Leary down to get 
the painting back. It all leads to a predictable, absurd climax, a 
suitable bookend to this dull comedy. You know, I heard Denis Leary 
say he devoted two years of his life to scripting this movie. It wouldn't 
have hurted to give it another two... if by sea, of course.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
and check out the 40+ new reviews since Christmas.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TWO IF BY SEA is a putative comedy reminsent of the SMOKEY AND THE
BANDIT series.  It was released without previews to most critics which
is usually a sign that the studio thinks their movie is in trouble.
Other than being poorly written (by first time writer Denis Leary),
sloppily directed (Bill Bennett), and overacted by every member of the
cast, it does have a few redeming features like picturesque views of
Nova Scotia.
     When the script is not getting on your nerves and the slured,
mumbled Bostonian accent so thick that you need subtitles is not
driving you crazy, you at least get to relive slapstick comedy scenes
from other bad movies.  Just to make sure you know they are trying to
mimic other movies, one character says to other "who do you think you
are, Burt Reynolds?"
     The movie starts with a small time crook named Frank O'Brien
(Denis Leary) being chased by a dozen cop cars.  Frank's girlfriend Roz
(Sandra Bullock) is with him.  In one of many derivative scenes, she
throws their map out the window.  The maps covers the window of a
police car which then goes into a ditch.  I found this slapstick
attempt at humor to be a total failure since the acting was so
overboard.  Two minutes into the movie and the movie is such a stinker
that it begins to reek.
     Other scenes you have seen a hundred times before include the one
where Frank is trying to run while putting his pants on, but he keeps
falling down.  In another long scene to kill time, we get to watch
Frank and Roz try on all the clothes in a huge walk-in closet.  We have
a flyfishing scene where Frank slips on the rocks, gets his line
tangled, and surprise, gets the hook stuck into him.  Finally, their
version of the Keystone Cops are so stupid that when the cops all board
the train, the thiefs get away by walking out the other side.
     Within fifteen minutes, I was ready to leave.  My wife wanted to
stay to see if it picked up; it didn't.  I confess that I actually saw
all of this piece of drivel.  Okay, so I did go to the lobby once for
five minutes to escape.
     The movie does have a plot.  Frank steals a painting which turns
out to be more valuable than expected.  His fence, Beano (Wayne
Robson), then wants to get the painting from him.  Detective O'Malley
(Yaphet Kotto) of the FBI is convinced that Frank is really famous art
thief Phil the Shill even though Phil died over a decade ago.  Frank
and Roz hide out in a rich but remote area where they are welcomed by
local millionaire Evan Marsh (Stephen Dillane).  The town is so small
that the police station is also the local video store.  The only one in
town who has Frank and Roz figured out is a kid about 12 years old
named Todd (Jonathan Tucker).  If you care, you can guess everything
that will happen after this.
     It takes many people to craft a movie this bad, but prime credit
has to go to Denis Leary (from THE REF) who not only gave a pathic
acting performance but came up with a script full of inanities.  Todd
tells Frank how to woo women.  He says, "Girls like muscles.  They like
muscles and romantic dinners."  Sometimes Leary thinks he is Frank
Capra.  His script has Frank O'Brien saying, "People like us are born
in little houses and die in little houses, and we've got to find
happiness somewhere in between."  Inserted into the middle of a bad
comedy, this line is totally out of place and does not work at all and
even if it did, Leary is incapable of delivering it in a believable
fashion.
     There is not a character in the show that is realistic and
certainly none you care about.  In theory there are two romances in TWO
IF BY SEA.  In reality there is no chemistry between anyone.  Bullock,
whom I loved in SPEED and liked in THE NET, is given poor direction and
manages to be incomprehensible and uninteresting.  Kotto seems to be
suffering from gas in most of the movie.  He just stands around and
frowns in most scenes while saying little.  Dillane gives a vacuus
performance as a mysterious and handsome stranger.  The worst
performance of the lot is Robson's.  Whenever Beano and his band of
incompitent small time crooks get on the screen, you want to shut your
eyes.
     I am amazed to report that some people in my audience actually
laughed at some of this stuff.  The only thing I could figure out was
that they were being tickled by their spouse to past the time.
     TWO IF BY SEA runs forever, 1:45 to be exact.  It is incorrectly
rated R.  There is no nudity, sex, or violence.  The language is mildly
bad in a few scenes.  I would have rated it PG-13 and with the deletion
of a couple of words, it could have been PG.  On the other hand, I
strongly recommend that you and your kids stay as far away from this
movie as possible.  I do give it one half of a star, but only because
it did not quite crack the threshold of pain, I reserve for zero star
movies.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TWO IF BY SEA is a putative comedy reminsent of the SMOKEY AND THE
BANDIT series.  It was released without previews to most critics which
is usually a sign that the studio thinks their movie is in trouble.
Other than being poorly written (by first time writer Denis Leary),
sloppily directed (Bill Bennett), and overacted by every member of the
cast, it does have a few redeming features like picturesque views of
Nova Scotia.
     When the script is not getting on your nerves and the slured,
mumbled Bostonian accent so thick that you need subtitles is not
driving you crazy, you at least get to relive slapstick comedy scenes
from other bad movies.  Just to make sure you know they are trying to
mimic other movies, one character says to other "who do you think you
are, Burt Reynolds?"
     The movie starts with a small time crook named Frank O'Brien
(Denis Leary) being chased by a dozen cop cars.  Frank's girlfriend Roz
(Sandra Bullock) is with him.  In one of many derivative scenes, she
throws their map out the window.  The maps covers the window of a
police car which then goes into a ditch.  I found this slapstick
attempt at humor to be a total failure since the acting was so
overboard.  Two minutes into the movie and the movie is such a stinker
that it begins to reek.
     Other scenes you have seen a hundred times before include the one
where Frank is trying to run while putting his pants on, but he keeps
falling down.  In another long scene to kill time, we get to watch
Frank and Roz try on all the clothes in a huge walk-in closet.  We have
a flyfishing scene where Frank slips on the rocks, gets his line
tangled, and surprise, gets the hook stuck into him.  Finally, their
version of the Keystone Cops are so stupid that when the cops all board
the train, the thiefs get away by walking out the other side.
     Within fifteen minutes, I was ready to leave.  My wife wanted to
stay to see if it picked up; it didn't.  I confess that I actually saw
all of this piece of drivel.  Okay, so I did go to the lobby once for
five minutes to escape.
     The movie does have a plot.  Frank steals a painting which turns
out to be more valuable than expected.  His fence, Beano (Wayne
Robson), then wants to get the painting from him.  Detective O'Malley
(Yaphet Kotto) of the FBI is convinced that Frank is really famous art
thief Phil the Shill even though Phil died over a decade ago.  Frank
and Roz hide out in a rich but remote area where they are welcomed by
local millionaire Evan Marsh (Stephen Dillane).  The town is so small
that the police station is also the local video store.  The only one in
town who has Frank and Roz figured out is a kid about 12 years old
named Todd (Jonathan Tucker).  If you care, you can guess everything
that will happen after this.
     It takes many people to craft a movie this bad, but prime credit
has to go to Denis Leary (from THE REF) who not only gave a pathic
acting performance but came up with a script full of inanities.  Todd
tells Frank how to woo women.  He says, "Girls like muscles.  They like
muscles and romantic dinners."  Sometimes Leary thinks he is Frank
Capra.  His script has Frank O'Brien saying, "People like us are born
in little houses and die in little houses, and we've got to find
happiness somewhere in between."  Inserted into the middle of a bad
comedy, this line is totally out of place and does not work at all and
even if it did, Leary is incapable of delivering it in a believable
fashion.
     There is not a character in the show that is realistic and
certainly none you care about.  In theory there are two romances in TWO
IF BY SEA.  In reality there is no chemistry between anyone.  Bullock,
whom I loved in SPEED and liked in THE NET, is given poor direction and
manages to be incomprehensible and uninteresting.  Kotto seems to be
suffering from gas in most of the movie.  He just stands around and
frowns in most scenes while saying little.  Dillane gives a vacuus
performance as a mysterious and handsome stranger.  The worst
performance of the lot is Robson's.  Whenever Beano and his band of
incompitent small time crooks get on the screen, you want to shut your
eyes.
     I am amazed to report that some people in my audience actually
laughed at some of this stuff.  The only thing I could figure out was
that they were being tickled by their spouse to past the time.
     TWO IF BY SEA runs forever, 1:45 to be exact.  It is incorrectly
rated R.  There is no nudity, sex, or violence.  The language is mildly
bad in a few scenes.  I would have rated it PG-13 and with the deletion
of a couple of words, it could have been PG.  On the other hand, I
strongly recommend that you and your kids stay as far away from this
movie as possible.  I do give it one half of a star, but only because
it did not quite crack the threshold of pain, I reserve for zero star
movies.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
