Title
Review for Little Rascals, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Way back in 1922, Hal Roach who had produced Laurel and Hardy and
Harold Lloyd silent comedies, came up with a comedic look at the
innocent adventures of children.  There existed at the time shorts with
child actors and with the movies designed for a young audience.  Roach,
on the other hand, aimed at both young and adults when he started his
series (originally called Hal Roach's Rascals).
     Roach employed unknowns in order to get spontaneity and naivete.
Child actors such as Shirley Temple were not even considered ... and
Mickey Rooney flunked his audition.  From the beginning the series was
a great success.  The question before the House is: what about this
1994 version?
     Director Penelope Spheeris had a great group of kids to work with,
many of whom looked very much like the original "gang," right down
through Petey, the dog with the black ring around one eye.  The problem
may be that this latest version is too cutesy.  Little Darla, for
example, who looks very much like the original, is made to act too
adult.  The action is for the kids in the audience while the gags are
for their parents.
     Despite the elements being there, the film is only mildly
amusing.  Although most of the new kids look very much like the
originals, it may be that imitation has its limitations.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Mildly engaging indy drama about a crusty Vermont logger (Rip
Torn) who won't surrender (i.e., sell) to developers who are planning a
dam that'll flood his leased land.  Beautifully photographed by Paul
Ryan and underdirected by Jay Craven, film is notable for an absence of
*any* ecological stand and for the one-two punch of leading pair Rip
Torn and Tantoo Cardinal (as his mate).  Forget the
what-passes-for-chemistry between Bridget Fonda and Nicholas Cage in IT
COULD HAPPEN TO YOU, here's a summer-screen couple that *sizzles*.
Oscar may notice.
>From the novel by Howard Frank Mosher.
     Terminally inoffensive update of the classic Hal Roach
shorts--from unlikely choice Penelope Spheeris (WAYNE'S WORLD, THE
     BEVERLY HILLBILLIES)--that stars a cast of unknowns as "Our
Gang."  The kids can barely act, the editing is a mess, and the plot
has more holes than 60-year-old film stock.  That said, the whole thing
has a breezy, infectious charm that (almost) overpowers the technical
demerits.
     Kids should love it, though adults may groan at gags that are
older than they are.  A half-dozen well-placed celebrity cameos help,
as does the blooper reel over the end credits.
     Tart, well-written comedy from Will Stillman (METROPOLITAN) about
two American cousins (Taylor Nichols and Chris Eigeman) living in said
Spanish city in "the last decade of the cold war."  The former is a
salesman, the latter is a Naval officer and, together, they spend most
of the film trying to avoid anti-American sentiment while wooing the
wild women of Barcelona.  Watch for some great, low-key gags about
shaving, ants, and underwear.
     Not hilarious, but *very* amusing.  Keen political edge, too!
     Small but powerful inner-city drama about a 12-year-old Brooklyn
boy (Sean Nelson) who sets-up a scheme to get himself and his sister
away from drugs (he's a courier, she's a junkie) and out of the
projects.  The well-written script--by first-time filmmaker Boaz
Yakin--is the draw here.  The premise may not be entirely believable,
but Yakin's crisp characterizations more than compensate for any
occasional lag in narration.
     Nelson is a find, a tough cookie who'll break your heart by the
end.  Samuel L. Jackson plays the father, a speed chess player who
injects enough life lessons into the game to make FRESH feel like a
companion piece to SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISHER.  Too bad the sound
enginnering is awful.  Don't expect to hear all the dialogue in this
one.
