Title
Review for Fukusho suruwa ware ni ari (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
A man gets into a truck with two co-workers.  He has done this many 
times before.  They joke casually and drive down the road a way.  The 
man and one of the co-workers get out, and go up a hill, out of sight 
of the truck.  The man then viciously kills his co-worker.  He returns 
to the truck, and later kills the other man, stabbing him repeatedly, 
remorselessly, in an act of unmitigated violence.  There is no obvious 
reason for him to do this.
There are many ways to respond when we hear about something like 
this.  Horror.  Incomprehension.  Sympathy for the victims' families.  
And curiosity.  Not the morbid curiosity which keeps tabloid 
talk-shows on TV, but the curiosity that makes us wonder why anyone 
would do something like this, hoping that if we understood, we might 
be able to come to terms with it.   Understanding might offer some 
measure of peace.
Shohei Imamura's VENGEANCE IS MINE is a lengthy, disturbing exercise 
in understanding.  As one would expect from the iconoclastic Japanese 
director, the serial killer (Ken Ogata, in a magnificent performance) 
is not treated in the expected manner.  This is not a suspense-filled 
yarn, pitting a brilliant detective against a wily villain in a deadly 
game of cat-and-mouse.  Imamura begins his film with the killer, 
Enokizu, already in police custody, aware that he will soon be 
executed for his crimes.  We are told how many people he killed, 
during the 78 days between the first murders and his arrest.  There is 
no suspense.
Instead, this is a character study told in flashbacks.  We meet 
Enokizu's father (Rentaro Mikuni), a devout Catholic who the young 
Enokizu considers a coward, after a key early childhood scene.  We 
meet his wife (Mitsuko Baisho), a young woman he impregnates and 
marries out of a sense of duty, not love.   He becomes a criminal, a 
con artist, and is imprisoned for fraud; his wife divorces him, but 
the father persuades her to remarry him.  He is released, and beats 
his wife for her infidelity.
The killings proceed logically from these past events, although we 
cannot point to a specific moment and say, 'That's what did it--that's 
what made him a murderer.' Later, we will meet his final victims, a 
brothel madam and her mother.  The madam (Mayumi Ogawa) falls in love 
with the killer, posing as a university professor, and remains devoted 
even after she learns what he has done.  He kills her too.  There is a 
sad inevitability to it all.
But because this is an Imamura film, it is not sad and reflective 
about what happens.  Shocking brutality and black humour are par for 
the course.  While there are only two notably violent scenes in 
VENGEANCE IS MINE (the first two murders), they are among the most 
disturbing I have ever seen.  The way Imamura accomplishes this is 
interesting.  He does not embellish the killings with stylistic 
flourishes, nor does he play campy music on the soundtrack Å• la Lynch 
or Tarantino.  He simply presents these brutal acts plainly, 
objectively, without excess.  The movie does not tell us what to feel; 
it simply shows what happens, putting as little distance as possible 
between audience and screen, leaving us to consider these heinous 
crimes in cold, merciless detail.  It is disquieting, and it is also 
superb directing.
Imamura views Japanese society with the same clinical detachment.  
His entire career is an ongoing critique of his society, and here we 
see a Japan which passively allows a killer to walk in its midst, and 
even accepts him, on some level.  Enokizu's face is on billboard 
notices, on TV, even in movie theatres, after the first two murders, 
yet he walks the streets of Tokyo and no one turns him in.  Some 
people notice his resemblance to the serial killer whose picture is 
being broadcast, but they figure that it either can't be him, or if it 
is him, it's not worth getting involved.  And so three more people die 
because of an apathy, a complacency, a malaise which Imamura sees as 
deep-rooted in Japanese society.
But the focus of the film is the killer, not his society, and by the 
time the end credits roll, we know Enokizu intimately.  He does not 
rant and rave very often; he is not visibly different from anyone 
else; he is intelligent and capable of charm.  But we are not 
surprised that he killed people--we are only surprised that it took 
him so long.
Do we understand his actions any better, finally?  Enokizu has the 
definitive answer to that: when a detective says that he still doesn't 
understand the motive for the last two murders, the killer replies, 
"You never will."  We are in the same position.  We'll never 
understand.  And so Imamura--whose films don't give you a warm, fuzzy 
feeling at the best of times--here presents the one thing worse than a 
world where a man kills people for no apparent reason: a world in 
which there really is no reason for his actions.  It's an 
uncomfortable message, but turn on the evening news tonight, or open 
the newspaper tomorrow morning, and you may find it hard to disagree.
