Title
Review for Signs of Life (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeff Meyer
[As some of you might know, the Seattle Film Festival finished about five
 months ago.  Well, uh... I've been busy...  -jm]
[Seen at the Seattle International Film Festival]
     This is another American Playhouse production that has an almost
trademarked style to it; I sometimes wonder if a film funded by the AP
underwriters is required to have a setting in small-town or rural America.  Its
scope isn't exceptional: it examines the effects of closing a small
boat-building firm in New England on its workers and their families and
friends, and it takes the "weekend-in-the-life" approach of studying its
characters in almost separate storylines.  One of the workers wants to go to
Florida to become a diver, but is hindered by having to care for his retarded
brother; another wants to follow his friend on his diving expedition, but
doesn't know how (or whether) to break up with his long-standing romantic
relationship.  The elderly owner of the company is desperately trying to drum
up business for another boat in the town; meanwhile, he's having hallucinations
of his dead father visiting him, trying to tell him something ... or are they
hallucinations?  And finally, Beau Bridges plays the company foreman, who is
desperately trying to find work in the town to support his wife and >5
children.
     The film takes a St. Elsewhere approach to its material: it's often funny
and whimsical, but it seems as if disaster could be around the corner.  The
film is emotionally satisfying; it isn't hugely imaginative in its conclusion,
but it didn't telegraph the ending at all, and worked nicely.  The actors all
give good performances, and carry off their roles well.  (Several of them were
also in MYSTIC PIZZA, and the almost-identical settings tends to merge the two
in my memory.)   The only exception is Bridges; his performance, and indeed his
entire sub-plot, seems to have almost been scotch-taped on at the last minute.
     Solid, enjoyable show; since it's an American Playhouse production, you'll
probably be able to see it on PBS sometime next year.
