Title
Review for Underneath (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     THE UNDERNEATH opens with a surreally bizarre, green-tinted shot of
Michael (Peter Gallagher), driving along the Austin, Texas backroads in an
armored car.  The coloration and the look of dread on his face are enough
to make you sick to your stomach.  These are also the perfect introduction
to a film noir where you just *know* nothing is going to turn out right.
     Michael is an ex-compulsive gambler, returned to his Austin hometown
ostensibly to turn his life around and get a real job, but in reality
having some less savory motives.  His ex-wife, Rachel (Allison Elliott),
is in town and attached to a local, small-time hood.  When Michael tries
to patch things up with Rachel, a plot suddenly (and quite inexplicably)
develops between the three to rob the armored car that Michael drives. 
The plan is hatched, and the fun begins.
     THE UNDERNEATH is director Steven Soderbergh's update of the 1949
noir CRISS CROSS.  Tracking the story along three different timelines,
it's a little difficult to get into, but once the action picks up, the
film is fairly engrossing.  As with any Soderbergh film, the camerawork is
exemplary, especially in the use of color as a symbol for the pervading
mood.
     The major problem here is that Elliott doesn't have "the look" to
pull off a Linda Fiorentino-style villain.  Instead, she looks and acts
more like a co-ed from the University down the street.  The writers have
also thrown in a few red herrings to keep you from figuring out the finale
too soon--not that you could, because the movie has a tacked-on, inane
ending that almost blows the whole film.
     Fortunately, it doesn't.  The movie's strong points (including some
nice work by Gallagher) manage to outweigh the negatives.  In the end, THE
UNDERNEATH succeeds more on the virtue of its good production values than
through a compelling or well-thought-out story.
