Title
Review for Swing Kids (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     SWING KIDS is a film directed by Thomas Carter, from a script by
Jonathan Bard Manulis. It stars Robert Sean Leonard, Christian Bale,
Frank Whaley, Barbara Hershey, and Kenneth Branagh (uncredited). Rated
PG-13 for language, violence, and adult situations.
     SWING KIDS, from Disney's Hollywood Pictures, is a film that was
hyped, then dropped, then finally released. I don't know why -- if but
someone in the know wants to write me, I'd be ever so appreciative.  I
wonder if perhaps the studio didn't lose its nerve for a while. After
all, the subject and the setting -- American swing music and Nazi
Germany on the eve of World War II -- are not the kind of contemporary
references that are most likely to attract audiences, especially those
younger audiences. Then, too, Disney was never able to sell its
excellent, but ill-named, 1992 musical NEWSIES to a large audience.
SWING KIDS is more of a drama cum dance picture, certainly not a
musical, but there are similarities, not the least of which is the
presence of Christian Bale in both. In NEWSIES, he was the hero, the
voice of individual freedom against the monolithic power of the
newspaper publisher. In SWING KIDS, he starts as one of the rebels
against Nazism who later succumbs to its promises and lies. In both
films, he has registered an excellent performance, with this most
recent one being all the more interesting because of the mixed messages
of his good-bad character, Thomas.
     Thomas's friend, and later enemy, Peter, is the hero here.  He is
played by Robert Sean Leonard, who was the suicidal young actor in
Peter Weir's DEAD POETS SOCIETY. Leonard turns in a wonderful
performance as the confused young man, whose original drop-out
opposition to the Nazis becomes confused, blurred, then clarified and
hardened by his experiences as "an H.J. (Hitler Jugend, or Hitler
Youth) by day and Swing Kid by night," as Thomas's formula put it.
     The dilemma the boys find themselves in is strongly reminiscent of
the Jewish boy who passes as an H.J. in EUROPA, EUROPA. This latter
film made a much stronger case, and demonstration, of who the Nazis
were, what they were doing, and what the moral and practical situation
was for everyone else. Both films concern themselves with identity,
with being co-opted by a seductive enemy, with the problem of staying
neutral and uninvolved in a world that insists you take sides, with the
problem of surviving. Peter is in no way as conflicted as the Salomon
(in EUROPA, EUROPA), and SWING KIDS is in no way as gut-wrenching or
mind-twisting as the German film. However, the American film is good,
effective, and interesting in its own way. Not only does it provide
several fine performances, including Frank Whaley as the intellectual
and musical center of the Swing Kids and Barbara Hershey as Peter's
frightened mother, as well as Kenneth Branagh as a slick, oleaginous
Gestapo officer (and when you write tell me why Branagh chose to
receive no credit for this part), but it also gives us several well
integrated dance scenes and lots of wonderful swing music.
     The dance numbers are naturalistic and exciting and often
humorous. The young dancers display a kind of raw enthusiasm for
jitterbug that is chaotic and as un-Nazi as anything one could
imagine.  Some reviewers have objected to making swing a metaphor for
freedom, but to me it seems natural and earned. Anyone who experienced
the first years of rock'n'roll knows how rebellious and in the broadest
sense political mere music and dance can be. Certainly, anyone who was
a part of the hippie "movement" knows that music and dress are not
merely the symbols, but the very stuff, of rebellion and revolution. To
the film's Nazis, swing was "Neger-Kike" music, Jewish Benny Goodman
was banned and his records were relabeled Gene Krupa to get around a
censor who hadn't caught to the fact that Count Basie wasn't the ruler
of some country. But it was a rebellion-by-avoidance and it was
unformed as a moral force or position; the Swing Kids could be as
anti-semitic as the H.J.'s. The dramatic tension in the film is the
development of swing as a moral idea, not merely adolescent rebellion
against authority and responsibility.
     The only problem I had with the film was its ending which seemed
forced and unearned. That and the fact that I am still unclear when the
Swings Kids were an historical fact or only the interesting invention
of the writer; so that's the third thing you can write to me about, if
you know. I can recommend SWING KIDS, even at full ticket price.  It is
an irresistible package of great music, good dancing, and an important
story.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robert Sean Leonard, Christian Bale, Frank Whaley,
           Barbara Hershey, Kenneth Branagh
Director:  Thomas Carter
Producers:  Mark Gordon and John Bard Manulis
Screenplay:  Jonathan Marc Feldman
Music:  James Horner
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     Hamburg.  Nazi Germany.  1939.  Peter (Robert Sean Leonard),
Thomas (Christian Bale), and Arvid (Frank Whaley) are three "Swing
Kids"--young rebel Germans who have fallen in love with the forbidden:
"American movies, British fashion, and Swing music."  When the evil
specter of Nazism hovers over them in the form of a seemingly-benign
member of the Gestapo (Kenneth Branagh), Peter and Thomas must begin to
re-evaluate their priorities and values.
     SWING KIDS is a movie with a multitude of problems, the biggest of
which is its loose treatment of history and the Nazis.  While it's
undeniable that members of the Hitler Youth and the Gestapo were goons,
SWING KIDS portrays them as such in a cartoonish manner.  They are not
chillingly menacing; simply nasty.  Motivation is not a major concern.
The kind of mentality that sent millions of Jews to their deaths is
only weakly in evidence.  In fact, the entire Holocaust is given only
token screen time.  The need to sanitize this film to make it palatable
to mass audiences has robbed SWING KIDS of much of its power.
Trivializing Nazism is never a smart move.
     There's another, more subtle flaw in the script.  Everyone in
Germany who isn't a "Swing Kid" is regarded as a Nazi.  This was simply
not the case.  Most Germans were not members of the National Socialist
Party, and many citizens regarded Nazis with fear and distrust.  The
Luftwaffe was definitely not a "Nazi organization", yet SWING KIDS
makes no distinction between Luftwaffe officers and the Gestapo.
     Aside from the aforementioned problems, the plot is lacking when
it comes to originality.  That shouldn't be a surprise, however, coming
from Hollywood Pictures, well-known for regurgitating formula movies.
What is unusual is that some of the elements of this film do not allow
it to fall into the "happily ever after" category.  In that sense, it
takes a little risk.
     There are several scenes of high melodrama where the film comes
close to parodying itself.  While the two leads, Bale and Leonard, have
been competent in previous roles, they are merely adequate here, and
sometimes not even that.  Barbara Hershey is completely wasted.
Kenneth Branagh, in an uncredited role (it's more than just a
cameo--he's in a number of scenes), is unsurprisingly one of the bright
spots about this film.  He manages to create a sympathetic Nazi without
resorting to audience manipulation.
     Undoubtedly, the best part of SWING KIDS is its musical numbers.
The choreography and energy of these scenes is excellent.
Unfortunately, they are too few and far between and by the second half
of the movie, they've all but disappeared.
     SWING KIDS will undoubtedly appeal to the masses--and especially
the teen masses--who go to the movies simply to escape.  In fact, some
of those with little knowledge and less concern about the historical
period portrayed may even find this movie "powerful."  At its heart,
however, SWING KIDS is seriously flawed, and, while it isn't a terrible
movie, the best way to describe it may be "unfortunate."
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
