Title
Review for Stay Tuned (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
################################################
LITTLE NEMO: ADVENTURES IN SLUMBERLAND is an animated feature film,
directed by Masami Hata and William Hurtz and written by Chris Columbus
and Richard Outten.  The voices are provided by Mickey Rooney, Rene
Auberjonois, and Gabriel Damon.  Rated G.
Little Nemo was the great, landmark creation of Winsor McCay, who was
one the most popular, most influential cartoonists in American history.
McCay can also be considered the father of animation due to his
pioneering animated cartoon "Gertie the Dinosaur."  "Little Nemo" ran in
newspapers for two decades and was immensely popular.  Today, we can
only look at those strips in wonder and amazement and with no little
sadness at the degradation of the medium in our niggardly times.
It was because of my admiration for McCay (who also authored the surreal
strip "Dreams of the Rarebit Fiend") that I had to see this animated
film.  The film successfully recreates much of McCay's art style, eerie,
monumental dream imagery full of surprise, wit, and irrational
juxtapositions.  Unfortunately, despite the presence of some important
talent, the filmmakers hedged their bet with a number of non-McCay
intrusions.  Little Nemo himself is too cute; the mischief making
trickster too nice; there's a flying squirrel buddy; there's a major
steal from the "Night on Bare Mountain" sequence in FANTASIA; and there
is a throw-away score of songs by the same Sherman Brothers who wrote
the songs for MARY POPPINS.  Unfortunately, the filmmakers ignored the
Victor Herbert Broadway version of Little Nemo, a smash hit of the 1908
season.
Overall, I found the film charming and engaging, probably not entirely
appropriate for the youngest children, and can recommend it to you at
matinee prices or as a future video rental or purchase.
#################################################
RAPID FIRE is a film directed by Dwight Little and written by Alan
McElroy.  It stars Brandon Lee, Powers Boothe, Nick Mancuso.  Rated R,
for chopsocky violence.  This is, of course, the vehicle meant to launch
Brandon Lee, Bruce Lee's son, as a film star.  While the film is never
going to be the pet of filmschools, it does deliver its promise of a
presentable action film.  And it is less gross, less gruesome than most
of the present generation of actions films, such as those of Van Damme
or Seagal.  In style and mood, it is closer to the older Lee's
swashbuckling, kidding movies.  The story is perfectly predictable, and
the addition of Tienanmen Square and a call to political responsibility
are not meant to be taken too seriously.  However, McElroy's script does
attempt to make the hero human and likeable.  The character actors are
fun to watch, too: Tzi Ma as an Asian godfather; Powers Boothe as the
good cop; and especially, Nick Mancuso as the psycho heavy.  I think Lee
does have a future; he has presence and some competence as an actor; he
is not so intense as his dad, but rather laid-back, slightly yuppified,
non-arrogant.
I can recommend RAPID FIRE at matinee prices or as a winter video treat.
################################################
STAY TUNED is a film directed by Peter Hyams and written by Tom
S. Parker & Jim Jennewein.  It stars John Ritter, Pam Dawber, Jeffrey
Jones, and Eugene Levy.  Rated PG.  This is one of those supremely dumb
movies that I am a sucker for.  Of course, TV is too easy a target of
satire.  Of course, having former TV personalities in the cast is
obvious.  But then, again, why not, it's summertime and the living is
easy.  This is, obviously, not a film to take seriously, but it's fun
enough while it lasts to justify a matinee ticket, especially if like me
one has an irrational fondness for John Ritter, despite his willingness
to appear to total dreck like the PROBLEM CHILD flicks; I concentrate on
his other, better kind of films, the ones no one goes to, like THEY ALL
LAUGHED and that theater farce he did with Carol Burnett et al.  at the
beginning of the summer.  This is somewhere in between, mostly harmless,
and that's high praise these days.  Jeffry Jones is always fun to watch,
too, and his track record is possibly even worse than Ritter's.  
Probably, you should save this one for a really dreary winter day and
rent the video.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     John Ritter is a tv-aholic.  Salesman Jeffrey Jones shows up at
Ritter's door one night and lets him have a free trial of a satellite
disk.  The disk eats Ritter and his wife, Pam Dawber.  They end up in a
television world, where if they survive for 24 hours, they get sent back
to their house.
     STAY TUNED is a very funny comedy, that makes up for Ritter's last
two mega-bombs PROBLEM CHILD and PROBLEM CHILD 2.  I recommend this
film to any fan of slapstick comedy or any movie buff.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give STAY TUNED a four.  STAY TUNED is rated PG for
adult situations.
     I think the thing I disliked the most about this film was the
beginning credits.  They tried to make fun of the opening credits of
some action and science fiction films.  I think that they could have
been better.  The beginning of the end credits was cute though.  The
names of upcoming television shows, like "Unmarried with Children" (one
of the lamer ones), are put on the screen, so you may want to stick
around.
     Some of the humor is Mel-Brookish in nature, especially the
Salt-n-Pepper video.  The film was constantly amusing and often
hilarious, but I doubt that it will do as well as similar films, like
HOT SHOTS! and THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR, considering some
of the other films out in the theaters, like UNFORGIVEN, SINGLE WHITE
FEMALE, and TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME.  Most likely this film will
find its audience when it is released on video cassette (and laser
disk).  None of the film will be lost on video cassette, so if you want
to wait for the video and see other current hits your viewing of the
film won't be harmed.
     I suggest that if you are planning to watch this film, that you try
to avoid seeing any commercials for it because they spoil parts of it
(e.g., "Driving Over Miss Daisy").  If you plan to see the film, I
suggest that you go see it soon because it has just left the theaters in
my area, and will probably be doing the same in your area soon also.
