Title
Review for Clean and Sober (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in 1962 Jack Lemmon had a reputation as a comic actor and
surprised audiences by playing a dramatic role and being *very* good at it.
The film was DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES.  The story was of a young couple with
everything going for them whose lives are ripped apart by an alcoholism
problem.  Somehow to audiences who had seen Lemmon in a humorous context,
his serious role seemed all the more serious.  Well, times have changed
since DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES, and while alcoholism is no less a problem drug
addiction is much more of a problem today so, perhaps even inspired by WINE
AND ROSES, comedy actor Michael Keaton is currently starring in the serious
CLEAN AND SOBER.
     While DAYS OF WINE AND ROSES concentrated on why a successful young man
would get an alcohol problem, it is clear from early on that Daryl Poynter
(played by Keaton) is a jerk who deserves the worst that his alcoholism and
drug problem will bring him, so the film wastes none of its 124 minutes on
how he got into this state.  Instead, the film starts with the incident that
finally causes Keaton to check himself into a detoxification clinic and
tells how even there he tries to sidestep his problem rather than
confronting it.  Most of the film covers Keaton trying very hard to relapse
into being once again the addict who embezzled $92,000 to support his habit.
The real heroes are ex-addicts Craig (played by Morgan Freeman) and Richard
(played by M. Emmet Walsh), who take no nonsense in trying to straighten out
Poynter against his will.  Craig runs the rehabilitation clinic; Richard
heads up the local chapter of Alcoholics Anonymous.
     Where CLEAN AND SOBER goes most astray is in Poynter's romantic
attachment to fellow clinic attendee Charlie Standers (played by Kathy
Baker).  In spite of the fact that both are addicts, Poynter's attempts to
get involved in Standers's life are something of a diversion and a
distraction from the central theme.  It is through his relationship with
Standers that Keaton will eventually get serious about his own problem, but
the screentime spent on that aspect of the plot is excessive in a film that
is overly long anyway.  That screentime could have been more effectively
used in telling the story of Poynter's problem.  It is good to see a serious
film, well-acted, on the problem of substance abuse, but a better film than
CLEAN AND SOBER really is needed.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
