Title
Review for Mindwalk (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Lon Ponschock
MINDWALK is a talkie.  Its three characters: a politician, a
poet and a physicist meet at a medieval castle on the island
of St.  Michelle in France.  The poet, who is also a
political speech writer, is called by the politician who
needs his help to be elected.  This the  set up.
     Low key is the phrase to describe MINDWALK.  It's a sort
of MY DINNER WITH ANDRE for those with a philosophical bent.
     I thought that it would be good for Easter Eve and I'm
running it again in the background as I write this in the
morning.  Though the film is low key, it's not boring but
succeeds in being visually interesting throughout.
     Here is probably a good place to throw in the fact that
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME will be available on video shortly as
well.
     These two films came out very close together and are
released close together for the home market.  Hey, maybe
they'll be on Public TV in two weeks, how could I know?
     MINDWALK is a conversation.  The writing here is what is
fascinating.  Fascinating because it is captured for a film
audience which will probably remain rather small.  MINDWALK
is a conversation about science and history.  Like James
Burke's _Connections_ programs on PBS, MINDWALK seeks to see
the world in a new way; to get a new perspective on what the
guy on Saturday Night live called 'the big picture.'
     It would be hard to put my finger on a politically
correct issue which is NOT in MINDWALK.  But it's virtually
impossible to talk about one thing without talking about
everything else.
     So MINDWALK is a good video to listen to and watch if
you are interested in _everything_. :-)
