Title
Review for Ofelas (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A thousand-year-old Lapp legend is the
     basis of this short, entertaining, occasionally bloody
     children's film from Lapland that will be entertaining for
     adults also.  How often do you get mystical legends in films
     from Lapland?  Rating: high +1.
     The plot has been done many times before, often but not usually as
well.  But this time there is a good reason for the well-worn plot.  This
time it is an adaptation of a millennium-old legend from Lapland.  In the
Tenth Century the story was considerably newer.
     Aigin, a teenager, returns from hunting one day to see his family's
camp overrun by marauding invaders, the Tchudes.  His parents and his young
sister have been murdered.  There are about eighteen of these Tchudes, all
dressed in black and armed to the teeth with crossbows: the leader's
crossbow is decorated with snarling fangs.  There is no doubt these are
pretty nasty dudes.  One slip and Aigin is running for his life through the
frozen landscape.  He runs for help to a nearby village but rather than help
Aigin they seem more anxious to pack up and run than to fight back.  So
Aigin decides he must fight the Tchudes himself.
     The attraction of THE PATHFINDER is not in the storyline, which would be
as easily fit to a post-Holocaust society and has been many times from ROAD
WARRIOR on.  Where THE PATHFINDER stands out is its depiction of Tenth Century
Lapp culture.  We get little hints of Lapp mysticism and culture.  We learn
superstitions, such as the belief that once you have killed a bear your gaze is
deadly for three days.  The entire story is framed in a mystical context in
which each person has a totem reindeer who appears at pivotal moments in a
person's life.
     This is basically a children's film with a little violence.  That is
more acceptable for children's films in other cultures than it is in ours.
Still, it is a well-constructed and filmed children's story, and one that
adults would enjoy also.  I would rate it a high +1.  At 88 minutes it is a
trifle short, but it is enjoyable.

Author
Pedro Sena
PATHFINDER is about a child that one day returns from his daily playing
around, only to find a group of 'evil' men are in the process of destroying
his family.  The young man, manages to escape, and get to another
group of people, where he immediately helps set up a small rebellion in
order to go after the evil men.
And finally they do so.  Amidst horrible weather conditions, extremelly deep
snow, and unforgiving grounds, they set out to destroy the evil group of
'men who have lost their way'.   A medicine man, in this type of grouping
they appear to be called the PATHFINDERS probably because they can use
intuition as a method to lead them to safety, tries to get the 'revenge'
factor out of the young man, or he would become just like them.  And they
proceed, until they come in contact with the evil group, and put quite a
dent on their manpower, before succumbing themselves.  The evil group knows
who the pathfinder is and try to get him to speak.  When he does not, they
begin torturing him until the young man can't stand anymore.  The young man
gives himself up and says he'll guide them only if they leave the old
pathfinder alone.  As they leave the evil leader kills the old pathfinder.
The young man proceeds to lead the evil group into a mountainous area where
they know the other family members are hiding.  Some menbers of that family
are now convinced the young man was bad luck, and
when their scouts notice the evil men being led, the general feeling is that
they have been betrayed.  Only the young girl who nursed the young man's
wound earlier in the film does not accept this.
In the mountameous  area, the evil men spot the campground.  Their prey is
in sight.  But the terrain is very rough.  The young man using his nimble
movement and superior strength manages to lead them quite a ways, before the
first one falls to his death.  At a given point, he pulls the rope, and
runs.  In the giving of chase, a few others die.  In the process, a mess of
tangled  bodies are left all over, with the leader having to cut the cord
which is linking them all, thus allowing others to die. And eventually a
major snow slide overruns the whole hillside. There is silence.  Back in the
campground, the family realizes, and thinks the young man has sacrificed
himself to save them. But the resilient young man, knew how to cover
himself, and avoid the landslide, or got lucky, it doesn't matter.  He
manages to get out of the cliff area and save himself, and then
walk to the campground where an astounded family watches him. He delivers
the drum of the old pathfinder, and he himself is  crowned the new
pathfinder.
A real brutal film, in that the evil never stops, and is as rough as the
terrain and the weather itself.  For some reason, and it is never clear,
they are merciless, and never stop. Filmed on areas that are extremely
beautiful and so full of snow as to make many of us jealous, this amazing
endeavor in shooting a film in the middle of the worst places, is a  triumph
itself, regardless of the story.  It is almost impossible to carry equipment
that is not designed for that kind of inclement weather.
And this film may have been filmed by a tribe, whose name seems to permeate
the credits.  Without any information on this film, this is all I can
deduce.  The film is a triumph of good over evil, despite the bad odds, and
natural elements.
