Title
Review for Blue (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Skelton
Capsule Rating: DAMNED IN THE USA is a movie about censorship.  While
it lets the right-wingers have their say, it is openly
anti-censorship.  Not only does DAMNED IN THE USA provide enough
material to make the viewer think about censorship, it also has many
hilarious moments, some from the stand-up schtick running throughout,
and some from the way people like Reverend Wildmon tries to explain the
Mapplethorpe phots ("He had his er ... um ... up the other man's ...
er ... um..")
     DAMNED IN THE USA uses many methods to make it's anti-censorship
points.  One of the main methods is by actually showing the audience
what is/was being censored.  When one first hears this, they begin to
think "Oh--I see--the whole idea of the movie is to show all that
naughty stuff".  Well, undoubtedly that's what drew a lot of the almost
sold-out audience, but Damned in the USA is much more.
     The movie interviews everyone from members of the religious right,
to friends of Robert Mapplethorpe, to try to find out what people love
and hate about the Mapplethorpe photos, "Piss Christ," THE LAST
TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, 2 Live Crew and other censored, or
almost-censored, works or artists.
     What makes DAMNED so intriguing is that it is a movie about
censorship--that was itself censored.  The movie begins with a short
retrospective of the court case this movie had to go through to be
approved for audiences.  The movie makes the case that censorship often
creates publicity for artists.  No doubt this happened for the movie
itself--and the movie deserves it.
     The movie features the stand-up act of an individual whos name I
forget, talking about censorship.  This provides humour throughout (as
if we didn't get enough laughs out of Wildmon).
     This is a movie for people that are against censorship.  Someone
who is anti-censorship would argue this movie looks at the argument
fairly.  In fact, despite to stand-up act woven throughout (which, in
some circles, could be construed as commentary), the movie never
actually makes a stand on the issue.  Someone who is for censorship -
will find this movie offensive.  Partly because it directly or
indirectly makes the religious right individuals look like idiots, and
partly because it shows the offensive pictures.
     I highly recommend DAMNED IN THE USA--for a good night of
enlightenment--and laughter.
     BLUE is a short movie about two things.  1. A guy (played expertly
by by David Cronenberg) who is addicted to porno magazines and 2.  A
retrospective interview with a porn queen of what seems to be the
1960s.  BLUE is a funny movie.  It's the kind of movie that people will
like, but may laugh harder that normal--as if to say, "Ha!  He's going
to masturbate--how funny!"  But even without that, it's a funny movie.
It's also an explicit movie.  It shows the insides of the porno
magazines, also, the interview with the 60's porn queen is over what
seems to be an actual porno movie--with all the explicity therein.
     However, the movie gets away with it, as it is obviously meant to
be satirical, and not exploitive.
[ Chad Skelton / prof. moriarty |  email: cskelton@realm.tdkcs.waterloo.on.ca]
