Title
Review for Mulino delle donne di pietra, Il (1960)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This film has been one I had been curious about for decades.  I
finally sprang for a copy from Sinister Cinema.  It is a French-
Italian production though it takes place near Amsterdam.  A writer
comes to a small town to write an article on what the locals call
"the Mill of the Stone Women."  It is no longer a functioning mill.
The inside has been turned into a clockwork display with moving
stone statues of women in sadistically macabre poses.  The writer
becomes entranced with the owner's beautiful but fatally ill
daughter.  The story is slow-paced but atmospheric.  Many of the
visual images are striking and make good use of images of stone
statuary.  The acting is not engaging and is further hampered by
poor dubbing.  The twisted interior of the mill recalls the
expressionism of early German and American horror films.  MILL OF
THE STONE WOMEN, Mario Bava's BLACK SUNDAY, and Roger Corman's HOUSE
OF USHER are stylistically similar though all were made in 1960.
The setting is unusual but the plot when one finds out what is going
on is one very commonly used in 1960s horror films from Europe.
There are some decent touches, but not enough to put this film on
anybody's must see list.  I rate it a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
