Title
Review for Keiner liebt mich (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Dorris Dorrie, who both wrote and directed this German-made film,
takes us and the heroine, Fanny Fink (Maria Schrader) on a one hour and
40 minute emotional roller coaster ride.  Fanny is pretty, dresses
nicely, and works at the airport checking luggage for anything
suspicious.  In addition, the job pays well enough to provide a nice
apartment.  What, then, is missing in that picture?   A man.
     All her friends are kind enough to keep reminding her that she is
fast approaching 30, after which she can give up on finding "THE
man."   Her best friend, and neighbor, Orfeo (Pierre Sanoussi-Blise) is
gay.  Orfeo lip syncs in a gay bar and frequently dresses in drag; not
exactly what Fanny is looking for on the romantic side.
     Fanny, beset with her problems, can think  of no one else but
herself.  Fortunately for Fanny, her platonic friendship with Orfeo
keeps Lothar (Michael von Au) the apartment house manager and a boor,
at a distance.  Despite the unhappiness that seems to hover over
Fanny, director Dorrie keeps it from becoming a downer somehow making
us feel that all will yet turn out well for Fanny.  Maybe there IS a
Man and at any moment her life may suddenly bloom.  I would like to
think that.
Written and Directed by Dorris Dorrie.

Author
James Berardinelli
     NOBODY LOVES ME is a charming, emotionally perceptive, German 
romantic comedy about the life of a woman who believes herself to be 
unloved and unlovable.  About to enter her fourth decade of life, Fanny 
Fink (the delightful Maria Schrader, who resembles Mary Louise Parker) 
is convinced that "a woman over 30 is more likely to get hit by an A-
bomb than find a man."  Her daily mantra is:  "I'm strong, I'm pretty, 
I'm intelligent.  I love and I am loved," but she speaks the words 
without conviction.  To potential suitors, she gives the advice, "I 
wouldn't fall in love with me if I were you."  Talk about a self-esteem 
problem!
     Although writer/director Doris Dorrie (STRAIGHT THROUGH THE HEART, 
MEN) has used a modern-day German woman to personify the angst and 
uncertainty associated with being single in the '90s, the fears and 
emotional upheaval suffered by Fanny are things that many people will be 
able to identify with, whether they're male or female, European or not, 
and young or old.  Dorrie's perceptiveness when it comes to this mindset 
is what makes Fanny such an endearing character and causes the film to 
be so compelling.  
     NOBODY LOVES ME is not a romantic comedy in a traditional sense.  
It's more about learning to appreciate what you have rather than what 
you don't.  Through the friendship of Orleo (the versatile Pierre 
Sanoussi-Bliss), a gay, black psychic, Fanny comes to understand the 
difference between seeing the glass half full and half empty.  She may 
not have a lover, but, in Orleo's words, she has "a job, a family, a 
place, and the right skin color", none of which apply to him.  
     According to Orleo's prediction, Fanny will find her "last chance 
at love" in a blond, thirty-ish man who is somehow associated with the 
number 23.  The likeliest candidate is the new manager of Fanny's run-
down highrise apartment building, Lothar Sticker (a suitably vacuous 
Michael Von Au).  Warned by Orleo that she must be aggressive, Fanny 
pursues him, but his interest in her is sporadic.  By falling for a man 
who clearly doesn't reciprocate her feelings, Fanny learns the pain of 
unrequited love.  In a moment of despair, she cries that she wishes she 
had remained emotionally sheltered.
     However, through this misery, Fanny comes to love Orleo.  As in 
CARRINGTON, where a heterosexual woman and a homosexual man develop an 
intense, platonic love, this pair becomes hopelessly emotionally 
entwined.  Orleo is dying, however, and the nearness of his death adds 
an immediacy to their relationship that might not otherwise be present.  
Through this, Fanny learns a lesson about what real "love" is.
     Despite the seriousness of some of the material, NOBODY LOVES ME is 
an uplifting motion picture, largely because of Dorrie's often self-
deprecating style.  Not only does she use humor to keep the film's tone 
light, but there's more than a sprinkling of magic realism.  The death 
symbolism is overdone to the point of being comical.  For a "conscious 
dying" class that she's taking, Fanny is making her own coffin.  When 
her mother is aghast to see her sleeping in it, Fanny remarks that it's 
actually quite comfortable.
     Dorrie has stated that the film reflects the prevalent aspects of 
the modern German character:  isolation and an almost-obsessive tendency 
to wonder about death.  I see these as more universal characteristics, 
however, and it's for that reason that NOBODY LOVES ME will likely 
connect with all audiences.  Whether you see yourself in Fanny or Orleo, 
or just prefer to watch these two as characters in a well-told story, 
Dorrie's film is worth a trip to the theater.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NOBODY LOVES ME (KEINER LIEBT MICH) is a Felliniesque film by
German director Doris Doerrie.  It tells the story of a woman named
Fanny Fink (Maria Schrader).  Fanny is a woman who is obsessed with
death and who is convinced that she is too old and will never find a
man.  As she says in the opening monologue to the camera, "I'm turning
thirty this year.  And you know the saying, a woman over thirty is more
likely to get hit by an A bomb than find a man".  As soon as she
finished that line, I knew this film was either headed to being a
successful off-the-wall comedy or a dog, but I feared it would be the
later.
     I should say upfront, that Schrader's is not American actress
Mary-Louise Parker's twin sister, but she sure does look like her.
Fanny has a severe insecurity complex.  She tells the audience, "I
wouldn't fall in love with me if I were you."  Fanny makes a point of
letting the audience know that she is not particular about the man she
is looking for either.  He doesn't have to be good looking, he just has
to have "an apartment of his own and good health insurance".  Her
mother, Madeleine (Elisabeth Trissenaar), is shown to be a cause of
much of Fanny's agony with such advice as, "Is your biological clock
digital?  Don't you hear it ticking?"
     Fanny lives in an apartment complex that looks like a drug
infested ghetto based on the outside and on the graffiti in the halls
and in the dilapidated elevator.  On the other hand, the insides of the
all of the apartments look solidly middle class as does Fanny's
clothing.  Why the set decorator (Claus Kottmann) and the costume
designer (Siegbert Kammerer) did this, I have no idea, but I did not
buy it.  The cinematography (Helge Weindler) makes Germany looks like
the last place on earth you would want to visit.  It is dark, gray, and
ugly.
     Fanny sleeps in a coffin she makes for herself in a class where
they also have a session where everyone puts a plastic bag over their
head and are told that "death is your friend."  Her clothes, ear rings,
and her apartment decorations are all heavily laden with skeleton
motifs.  Although this fascination with suicide worked in HAROLD AND
MAUDE, here it comes off as a cheap way to enliven Doris Doerrie's
ridiculous script.
     Fanny meets and forms a kinship with a bizarre African mystic,
Orfeo de Altamar (Pierre Sanoussi-Bliss), who lives in her apartment
complex and whose apartment looks like a Banana Republic outlet.  It
seems that the occupants of the complex are all behind in their rent,
so a new building manager, Lothar Sticker (Michael Von Au), comes to
give them red roses to gain their trust and then turns off their water
when they do not pay.  Most people hate him, but Fanny decides he is
her Prince Charming.
     Since Lothar says that, "My car is my home where I mediate and
relax", she figures that a good way to get to know him better is to
drive her car into a head on collision with his while he is parked.
This actually works, and he takes her to his apartment and pours her
coffee while telling her, "black coffee - better than cocaine and
faster."
     I think Maria Schrader demonstrates significant potential by being
able to shine through this miserable material.  As for the other actors
and actresses in this movie, if I never see any of them again, I do not
think I will have missed much.  The story is mess from start to finish
and is filled with characters I did not care about in the least.
     NOBODY LOVES ME drags on at 1:44.  It is in German with English
subtitles.  It does not have an MPAA rating, but it is a soft R show
with a little sex and nudity.  It would not harm any teenager, but I do
not recommend that anyone waste their time with this show.  It has an
interesting concept and nothing more.  I give it one half of a * solely
for Schrader's performance.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
