Title
Review for Blue Thunder (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Less than a week ago Pope visited my town, and such,
once-in-a-decade, event caused a lot of commotion among its
citizens. Traffic was stopped, all the city services were in
the state of emergency, and many aspects of everyday life
weren't there any more. But, those were just a annoyances
compared with the huge security operation that lasted weeks
and months before the event. Both regular and secret police
was conducting door-to-door searches of all the apartments
and houses on the Pope's route; those who hadn't been
visited by police had to endure endless sounds of
helicopters flying over their heads and peeping into their
homes in search of imaginary terrorists and assassins.
Probably the very same thing happened in Los Angeles in the
eve of 1984 Olympic Games. Fears of all-powerful and
all-controlling government corresponded with the Year of
Orwell, and movie producers in Los Angeles were affected by
it just like any other citizens. Their paranoia actually
inspired them to make a techno-thriller BLUE THUNDER, now
almost forgotten, but in its time regarded as one of the
best action movies of all times.
The movie's hero is Frank Murphy (Roy Scheider), helicopter
pilot in Los Angeles Police Department, who does his job of
flying policeman very well, despite the traumas he suffered
in Vietnam. After being united with rookie pilot Lymangood
(Daniel Stern), he must test the new prototype of next
generation police helicopter - Blue Thunder. The machine is
equipped with automatic cannons, armour, ultra- sensitive
microphones and cameras, and with its silent engines can
sneak into any part of the city almost unnoticed and wreak
havoc or spy the unsuspecting inhabitants. Such powerful
helicopter is to be used as part of security for the
Olympics, or so the Federal people, led by Colonel Cochrane
(Malcolm McDowell), his Vietnam nemesis, say to suspicious
Murphy. But after he finds evidence that connects urban
riots and the death of city official with the Blue Thunder
project, his life is in danger. In order to save himself and
warn the public, Murphy steals Blue Thunder and instantly
becomes the target of spectacular manhunt by police and
military.
One of the things that makes this movie so different from
other contemporary action hits is its leftist
anti-government agenda, which is in huge contrast with
neoconservative American jingoism, so strong in Hollywood
during the Reagan years. Instead of being the celebration of
new military and police technology, BLUE THUNDER clearly
warns the people of its possible abuses (even in the first
shot, when the caption says that the "technology depicted in
this film is real and in use in USA today"). Some of those
abuses might be quite harmless - like the crew of police
helicopters that peep into bedrooms of beautiful women, but
it also can become quite frightening, like a recorded case
of adultery. From those small abuses it takes the really
small step to the huge conspiracy that would bring mayhem to
unsuspecting public and throw them into the jaws of
omnipotent police state. Those who want to control the
masses from the air don't even need technological
superwonders like Blue Thunder; regular helicopters are
enough to make life miserable for any opposition in the
ground.
Unfortunately, very good screenplay by talented Dan O'Bannon
uses this dark overtones of 1970s political paranoia only in
the first half. The carefully paced development of the plot
serves only as an overture before the grand finale, when the
politically conscious writer gives reign to action-oriented
director. The ominous machine in the hands of the powerful
conspirators is introduced in a shot that presents it as a
threatening monster; however, when our protagonist gets a
hand to it, it becomes a weapon of a superhero. The director
John Badham, whose filmography shows that he can make
masterpieces when given a good script (unfortunately, that
didn't happen in more than a decade), is using the second
part to make one of the most effective and impressive action
scene in the last two decades of Hollywood movies. With the
elements of chase and dogfight, and very cleverly done
special effects (something very hard to imagine in today's
computer- generated era) he uses the superb editing of the
reactions bellow to give some pseudo-documentary feel to
this action fantasy. He is so effective in it, that the
viewer forgets to ask the simple questions, like "how can
thousands of explosive rounds and numerous missiles can be
fired in the middle of crowded city without single civilian
casualty". However, suspension of disbelief is somewhat
over- stretched in the last scene, when the highly
implausible final dogfight between Cochrane and Murphy
serves only to finish the story with the clichÂ‚ more
appropriate for Playstation action games than serious movie.
Despite the silliness at the end, BLUE THUNDER as a whole is
a exceptional piece of good Hollywood cinema. The actors are
superb - Roy Scheider is very believable as a reluctant hero
who works well despite the stress and war traumas. Daniel
Stern looks charming as a boyish sidekick, so different from
the psychos he played in the later parts of his career. Such
role is, on the other hand, somewhat overplayed by usually
creepy Malcolm McDowell, who didn't even bother to get rid
of the English accent (it was easier to write his English
background in the story than to hire a dialogue coach).
Other supporting actors are good, especially Warren Oates in
his last role as Scheider's sympathetic boss. The electronic
music of Arthur B. Rubinstein, with its enchanting yet
menacing theme, works very well in order to enhance the
movie's gloomy atmosphere. All in all, BLUE THUNDER is a
movie that should be both the real inspiration for the
makers of future action cinema and the warning to all those
who forget how helpless the individual can be against the
government.
