Title
Review for Where Angels Fear to Tread (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
114 min., PG, Drama, 1991
Director: Charles Sturridge
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Judy Davis, Rupert Graves,
      Giovanni Guidelli, Barbara Jefford, Helen Mirren
     A widowed woman falls in love and plans to get married with a man
from another culture.  Her family doesn't like the marriage and tries to
get her to reconsider.  I know that this is very vague, but I really
couldn't think up a good summary without giving away a lot of the plot.
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD has gotten a rave review (that I saw),
but I don't think that it is that good.  It is a good film but it is
slow in some places and over dramatic in others.  On a scale of zero to
five I give WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD a three (with reservations).
WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD is rated PG for adult situations.
     The biggest problem that I found with this film is that it got
rather boring in some places, and too emotional in other places.  I
think that if this film had been trimmed down to an hour and a half it
would have ended up a much better film.
     The actors/actresses do a great job.  I don't think that there were
any whose performance I disliked the performance by.  In that aspect
this film is great, and the only reason that the film ended up with a
three (with reservations) for a rating.  Otherwise it would have ended
up with a two.  I am sure that there are many people who will love this
film, it is just that I am not one of them.  So don't take my word as
the gospel and feel that this film is absolutely terrible.  If this film
sounds really great to you, you will probably love it, but if you go, I
can only suggest matinee prices.

Author
Frank Maloney
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD is a film directed by Charles Sturridge.
The script was written by Sturridge, Tim Sullivan, and Derek Granger,
from the novel by E.M. Forster.  It stars Helena Bonham Carter, Judy
Davis, Rupert Graves, Giovanni Guidelli, Barbara Jefford, and Helen
Mirren.  Cinematography is by Michael Coulter, and the production design
by Simon Holland.  Rated PG, due to subject matter.
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD proves that the works of E.M. Forster
are not the exclusive property of the Merchant-Ivory juggernaut (which
will be rolling out HOWARD'S END shortly).  Charles Sturridge (A HANDFUL
OF DUST) and his collaborators have produced a splendid and faithful
translation of Forster's first novel to the screen.  Sturridge has
managed to round out some of Forster's cardboard-cutout characters, as
well as to bring out Forster's great, but often neglected, gift for
comedy.  But most of all he has given a strong actors' film that
breathes with a life of its own.
     Many of the principals are veterans of other Forster adaptations,
but here they turn in individualized performances that sometimes rise,
as in the case of Rupert Graves, to a career best.  Judy Davis was in A
PASSAGE TO INDIA, Graves in A ROOM WITH A VIEW and MAURICE, Helen Bonham
Carter in A ROOM WITH A VIEW and the upcoming HOWARD'S END.
     Rupert Graves gives us his personal best as the ineffectual, but
kindly, Phillip Herriton.  Phillip tells us that "Some people are born
not to do things."  It is his moral situation that more is the center of
the story.  His actions and words, his inaction and silence, start and
end the drama.  He has a wonderful scene involving opera and loosening
his Edwardian respectability, but he also has to face up to the price to
be paid.  He does so poignantly, full of love and friendship, in a
moving, yet light-handed, performance.
     Helena Bonham Carter works against type to some degree here.  No
mad scenes for her this time, although she is very angry.  Her
characterization of the quiet, fuming Caroline Abbot is rich and
restrained.
     Quite the opposite performance is registered by the inestimable
Judy Davis, who has become one of my favorite performers only since
IMPROMPTU, more shame on me.  Although she's been making films for years
(MY BRILLIANT CAREER, 1979, being her debut credit, I believe) and I've
seen her without focusing in on her as a personality.  This is no doubt
a tribute (of sorts) to her remarkable skills at characterization.  Her
Harriet Herriton is strait-laced, no-nonsense, embittered, provincial,
narrow, selfish, hysterical, and at times uproariously funny.  Davis's
bag of physical tricks include tics, tsk-tsks, tears, flinches, and a
body held more rigidly than any corset could ever have managed.
     Helen Mirren plays Lilia, the doomed in-law of the Herritons.  She
is sexy and earthy, a tiny rebel against both the superficialities and
rigidities of the England she flees and the Italy she finds a kind of
refuge in.  Mirren and Davis are great beauties, who, because they are
also great actors, can turn their beauty off and on to suit the moment.
Davis especially achieves a terrible pinched look, but Mirren can look
worn out and used as her life unravels.
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD is foremost a social comedy that asks
something very serious of us -- that we take part in life whatever the
risks, that nothing is worse or more dangerous than the bystander.  I
recommend it strongly, no matter what the ticket price.
