Title
Review for Short Circuit 2 (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It would be hypocritical of me to say that SHORT CIRCUIT 2 is a big
come-down from SHORT CIRCUIT since, frankly, I was not much of a fan of the
first film.  Also, I hate to see a sequel be too much like the original, and
it true that SHORT CIRCUIT 2 was not much like its predecessor.  What it was
like was any of dozens of throw-away summer films. The basic plot could have
been done as a sequel to anything from THE LOVE BUG to STARMAN with small
variations.  In fact, with the exception of Ally Sheedy's off-screen voice
in one scene, there are only two characters in common with the first film.
One is Number Five itself, now mysteriously called by Everyone Johnny Five;
the other (I am sorry to report to all Asian Indians) is Ben, the
malapropping Indian robotics specialist who is now a toy manufacturer.
     Ben is in a major United States city--the script seems to imply it is
New York, but you see just about every Toronto landmark except Toronto Tower
itself.  He makes a deal with a department store that he will make a
thousand toy replicas of Number Five in time for Christmas, a deal that gets
him involved with small-time thieves and big-time bank robbers.  But Number
Five is reduced to being just a cute character made out of electronics
parts.  Whether or not he is alive--the major point of the first film--has
little to do with SHORT CIRCUIT 2.
     All this is not to say that there were not a few fairly funny jokes in
SHORT CIRCUIT 2.  I remember laughing more than once at what was happening,
but I frankly expect more from a movie than a few good gags.  If you think
that a dozen or so laughs are worth the price of an admission ticket, be my
guest.  My recommendation, however, is to wait to rent it or see it on
cable.  Rate it a flat 0 on the -4 to +4 scale--for the sake of those dozen
reasonable gags.
