Title
Review for Scam (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Whenever mothers tell their sons to beware of certain kinds
of women, they probably have protagonist of this film in
mind. "Heroine" of SCAM, 1993 TV thriller directed by John
Flynn, is Maggie Rohrer (played by Lorraine Bracco), con
artist who seduces rich single men only to slip
tranquillisers in their drinks and clean their valets while
they sleep. John Shanks (played by Christopher Walken), her
latest potential target is not only able to see through her
act but actually wants to use it for the scheme of his own.
The idea is to rip off powerful crime lord by stealing his
programmer's computer files. Maggie agrees to participate in
the scam but she doesn't trust her new partner, especially
after she finds hints that could give entirely different
motives to his actions.
Script by Craig Smith (based on his novel) looked quite
interesting, providing crime story which revolves about
intrigue and mind games instead of gunplay. Director John
Flynn, specialised for action films, had quite impressive
cast for this TV production - always reliable Christopher
Walken is great as con artist with mysterious motives, while
Lorraine Bracco is quite believable as not very glamorous
but successful professional seductress. Unfortunately, it
seems that Flynn and the rest of the crew got a little bit
too relaxed during the production - movie looks rather
cheap, Jamaican locations aren't used enough, and the plot
in the end becomes quite predictable despite endless twists.
Final result is rather disappointing, and the good actors
got wasted in the film that didn't rose above mediocrity of
American TV production.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
