Title
Review for Blue in the Face (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Christopher Null
     It took all of five days after wrapping the shoot of SMOKE to
create BLUE IN THE FACE, an (allegedly) all-improvised follow-up to
Wayne Wang and Paul Auster's feature centered on a tiny smoke shop in
Brooklyn.  It's a weird experiment in filmmaking, studded with cameos
by Lou Reed, Madonna, Michael J. Fox, Roseanne, Lily Tomlin, and more.
Unfortunately, you've probably seen all the funniest bits in the
movie's trailer.
     Separated into segments with titles like "Brooklyn Attitude," BLUE
IN THE FACE explores the Brooklyn mystique and the Brooklyn experience
with video interviews and impromptu sketches.  Everything "Brooklyn" is
praised, from Ebbets Field and Jackie Robinson to Belgian Waffles and
the sanctity of the local cigar store.
     A lot of this is hilarious:  Reed as the smoke shop
employee/eyeglass frame inventor who's been thinking about leaving the
city for 35 years; Jim Jarmusch as Bob, who is finally giving up his
Lucky Strikes; Fox in an insanely comical turn as a spontaneous social
analyst/psychologist; Mel Gorham as Violetta, Auggie's only partially
stable girlfriend.
     Holding the craziness together (sort of) is Auggie (Harvey Keitel)
and the Brooklyn Cigar Co. where he works.  When news that the store
has been sold arrives, Auggie does his best to change the owner's
(Victor Argo) mind, culminating in the appearance of the ghost of
Jackie Robinson, who convinces him the store should stay open.
     This is not your typical Hollywood fare.  It's not typical
*anything.*  Clocking in at about 76 minutes, BLUE IN THE FACE clearly
has the look and feel of a spontaneous collection of vignettes, some of
which work, and some of which don't.  It's worthwhile for the funny
bits, and the film isn't long enough to make you lose interest when it
drags.  I suppose it did what it was supposed to do (that is, give
everyone who wasn't in SMOKE something to do for a few afternoons).
You'll have to be the judge if that was a good idea or a bad one.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 9/95-10/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:25
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, nudity, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Harvey Keitel, Giancarlo Esposito, Jim Jarmusch, Lou Reed,
      Mel Gorham, Stephen Gevedon, Jose Zuniga, Victor Argo, Roseanne,
      Michael J. Fox
Directors:  Wayne Wang and Paul Auster
Producers: Harvey Keitel, Harvey Weinstein, and Bob Weinstein
Scenarios developed by Wayne Wang, Paul Auster, and the actors
Cinematography: Adam Holender
Music: John Lurie
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     While filming SMOKE, writer Paul Auster and director Wayne Wang
became aware that there was a wealth of untapped potential in the
secondary characters.  So, after devising a number of thumbnail sketches
for scenes, they approached Miramax to request funding for a second
movie.  The outcome is BLUE IN THE FACE, a low-budget companion piece to
SMOKE that was filmed in less than a week.
     BLUE IN THE FACE had no script and the direction by Auster and Wang
was minimal.  This resulted in an improvisational picture the likes of
which is rarely seen in theaters.  There is no plot to speak of--just
a series of disconnected vignettes.  The directors gathered their actors
together, started rolling the cameras, and told the men and women to
talk until they were "blue in the face."
     Those expecting something of the emotional and narrative depth of
SMOKE will be disappointed.  BLUE IN THE FACE is an entirely different
sort of film.  From start to finish, it's pure experimental fun--faux
cinema verite, philosophical ramblings, lengthy dialogue between
characters, musical interludes, and video inserts.  And, whereas SMOKE
was a drama, BLUE IN THE FACE is undeniably a comedy.
     The central element of BLUE IN THE FACE--the glue that holds
everything together--is an appreciation of Brooklyn.  During the
course of the film, we're exposed to the Brooklyn of the past, the
Brooklyn of today, and an idealized Brooklyn that exists only in
memories tinged by fondness and nostalgia.  BLUE IN THE FACE explores
the sense of community that makes this New York borough unique, and
examines how the loss of the Dodgers created a vacuum that nothing has
since filled.  There's also a discourse on Belgian waffles, the
"official" food of Brooklyn, which, as we learn, have little to do with
any food actually served in Belgium.
     The lack of continuity is one of BLUE IN THE FACE's charms.  At the
outset, Harvey Keitel comments, "I doubt any of this makes sense any
more..."  He's right, but it doesn't really matter.  The film is so
exuberant that we don't care whether we're listening to Lou Reed's
off-the-cuff comments about New York, watching Mel Gorham do a sexy
dance in front of a mirror, or hearing Jim Jarmusch's ramblings on the
romance of the smoking culture.  In every scene with every character,
you can feel the spontaneity.
     There are numerous cameos, most of which are successful.  Lily
Tomlin plays a man in search of Belgian waffles, Michael J. Fox is an
oddball survey taker, Victor Argo strums the guitar, and RuPaul comes
strolling by.  Not all the guest shots add value, however.  Madonna's
brief turn as a singing telegram messenger is superfluous, and Roseanne
displays an amazing lack of screen presence in her two scenes.  To
further highlight the TV star's lack of acting ability, she appears
opposite Keitel, who is in top form.
     Ignoring Roseanne (which is easy to do, since, mercifully, she's
not on screen for long), BLUE IN THE FACE has few missteps.  Sure, it's
a little raw, but polish is an undesirable quality in this kind of
production.  This film is designed simply to entertain--a task it sets
about in a most unconventional manner.  With BLUE IN THE FACE, Auster
and Wang may just be blowing smoke, but it's a colorful and aromatic
concoction.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLUE IN THE FACE was made by the same directors (Wayne Wang and
Paul Auster) that made the highly acclaimed SMOKE.  In fact, the whole
reason that BLUE IN THE FACE was made was that the directors and the
cast found that they had an extra week on their hands, so hey, they
decided to make a fast, improvisational movie with the same sets and
some of the same cast.  The result is a fun, upbeat movie that is
another talk fest just like SMOKE, but not as serious - think of it as
SMOKE-lite.
     BLUE IN THE FACE is a series of vignettes.  The writing is
credited to the directors, but it feels like the actors were winging it
most of the time.  The movie is again set in the Brooklyn Cigar Company
run by Auggie Wren (Harvey Keitel) but owned by Vinnie (Victor Argo).
The subject this time is Belgium waffles, Jackie Robinson (Keith
David), the passing of the Brooklyn Dodgers, and the destruction of
Ebbets Field.  A subplot has Vinnie closing the cigar shop to turn it
into a health food store since, "Tobacco is out.  Wheat germ is in."
There is also attempted infidelity and robbery, but most of all, it is
just a bunch of good friends of all ethnic groups standing around and
gabbing about life.
     The picture starts with a 10 year old kid (Sharif Rashed) stealing
the handbag of a beautiful, miniskirted, young woman (Mira Sorvino from
Barcelona).  Auggie chases the kid down only to have the woman say let
him go.  Auggie takes the bag from the woman and gives it to the kid
and tells him to beat it.  She is nonplused.  The movie is a series of
crazy incidents like that.
     Intertwined with the regular movie, there are two different series
of interviews, documentary style.  One series is done with a cheap
camcorder that produces grainy, saturated images.  I believe that these
interviews were real.  There is also a set of made up interviews,
mainly of an unnamed owner (Lou Reed) of another smoke shop.  He is a
talker, a philosopher, and a long time New Yorker.  He tells us, "I'm
scared twenty-four hours a day, but not in New York.  I'm scared in
Sweden" and then he goes on to explain it is because they keep
benevolently looking after his every move there.  In another of his
scenes, he says, "Yes, I am smoking cigarettes and some of my friends
have died of them, but I am not downing a quart of Scotch in fifteen
minutes.  Looked at that way, cigarettes are actually a health tool!"
     One of Auggie's regulars, Bob (Jim Jarmusch), decides to give up
cigarettes, but smoke his last one with Auggie.  Bob regrets having to
give them up, saying that, "Coffee and cigarettes.  That's like the
breakfast of champions."
     Keitel makes you feel good to be alive.  His smile is infectious.
You want so bad to be there swapping stories.  In fact the ultimate
message of the film has to be that the brotherhood of mankind
transcends all races.  Many scenes feature actors of one race telling
how many people of some other race live in Brooklyn.
     I have only touched on the numerous sketches in BLUE IN THE FACE.
Among others, you get to see a signing telegram one with Madonna and a
seduction one by the store owner's wife, Dot (played by none other than
Roseanne).  And on and on.
     It is a fun time at the movies.  The sets by Kalina Ivanov are
just as imaginative and realistic as in SMOKE since they are the exact
same ones.  The costumes (Claudia Brown) are a little more outlandish
than SMOKE since I think she wanted to tease the audience a bit more.
The cinematography (Adam Holender) is natural but not anything special.
     BLUE IN THE FACE is edited (Maysie Hoy) crisply and runs a fast
1:29.  It is rated R for a little nudity and a little bad language.
Personally, I would have given it a PG-13.  It would be fine for any
teenager, and perhaps even slightly younger kids.  This is a little
movie that I am not wild about, but did enjoy, and I can and do
recommend it to you.  It gets ** 1/2 in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Why are the trailers giving away so much plot, these days?  I've
seen *far* more of NICK OF TIME, FATHER OF THE BRIDE II, and MR.
HOLLAND'S OPUS that I ever necessarily needed to.  The ads for OTHELLO
look good, though, and wisely avoid overdoing the dialogue.  (Here's a
thought: how about Demi as Desdemona?  Moor versus Moore?  Iago-a-
go-go?  Imagine the ending to *that* one!)  The new Woody Allen, MIGHTY
APHRODITE, is in limited release and doesn't open in our area until
November 10th.  Grrr.  The same weekend as ACE VENTURA 2.  The other
big dates:  November 17th, for AMERICAN PRESIDENT and GOLDENEYE, and
November 22nd, for FOUR ROOMS, CASINO, TOY STORY, and, maybe, MONEY
TRAIN, NICK OF TIME, and WAITING TO EXHALE.  Phew.
     I walked out of SMOKE; I stayed for BLUE IN THE FACE.  Paul Auster
and Wayne Wang's improvised, quasi-sequel to SMOKE is a mildly
diverting, occasionally hilarious love-letter to the borough with an
attitude.  Short sketches, star testimonials, and man-on-the-street
interviews make for an amusing, if slight, exploration of all things
that are Brooklyn.  So, in addition to cameos by Madonna, Lou Reed, Jim
Jarmusch, Lily Tomlin, Mira Sorvino, and Michael J. Fox, expect plenty
of talk about the Dodgers, Belgian waffles, and plastic bags in the
trees.
     Three movies in one.  A coming-of-age tale set in the South Bronx,
a tour of duty in Vietnam, and an armored car heist.  The last is the
one that they show in all the ads, and the least successful segment in
this well-intentioned period drama from Albert and Allen Hughes (MENACE
II SOCIETY).  Good humor and honest performances in the first segment
lead into a stunning war sequence that's not for the faint- hearted.
(Severed heads and strewn intestines, anyone?)  The Big Heist, at the
end, is where the narrative becomes choppy.  Huge chunks of the story
seem to be missing, perhaps to trim an already- healthy running time?
By the end, nothing makes sense.  If there's an overt social statement
lurking about, it's buried under a mound of other, unresolved issues.
     The polite chemistry between Edward Fox and Vanessa Redgrave is
the reason to watch this frothy, light comedy about a pair of Britons
vacationing at a lakeside resort in Italy.   The veteran actors are a
joy to behold, despite director John Irvin's incessant close-ups and a
story that sags toward the end.  Uma Thurman co-stars as an American
nanny whose disposable flirting with Fox gets taken far more seriously
than it should be.  She's also a bit of a sore thumb, here, in
comparison to the more-distinguished acting styles of the others.
>From the novella by H. E. Bates.
     Eddie Murphy sucks.  Authentic horror director Wes Craven
(NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET) tries in vain (vein?) to strike a balance
between the jugular and the funny bone.  He fails at almost every
cross.  Eddie sleepwalks through his undead performance as a Caribbean
Count, scouting the borough for his half-vampire mate (Angela Bassett,
who has seen stranger days).  The laughs are few, the set design is
lousy, and there isn't one single campy cameo to speak of.  Even John
Landis did better with his half-baked INNOCENT BLOOD.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
** 1/2
Directed by Wayne Wang & Paul Auster, with "situations created"
         by Wang & Auster in collaboration with the actors.
Photography, Adam Holender.
Editing, Christopher Tellefsen.
Production design, Kalina Ivanov.
Costumes, Claudia Brown.
Video segments director, Harvey Wang.
Cast: Lou Reed, Michael J. Fox, Roseanne, Mel Gorham, Jim Jarmusch,
      Lily Tomlin, Jared Harris, Giancarlo Esposito, Malik Yoba,
      Joe Zuniga, Victor Argo, Stephen Gevedon,
      the John Lurie National Orchestra, Sharif Rashed, Mira Sorvino,
      Keith David, Peggy Gormley, Harvey Keitel, and others.
A Miramax film.
89 min.
Rated R (language). 
     What do you call a sequel that's not a sequel?  As director Wang
and writer Auster were making the wonderful SMOKE, they realized that
the members of their cast were "assuming a life independent of their
script."  So they had the notion of making a sort of (very much sort of)
follow-up that could be shot fast (it took six days), use available
actors from SMOKE (these are few), add many new, mostly volunteer
performers, do the whole thing as a series of improvisations as opposed
to the carefully scripted SMOKE.
     This time both Wang and Auster are listed as directors.  They also
"created situations" with the help of the cast.  The film was shot in
six days with part of the SMOKE crew and several replacements.  The
funding, provided by Miramax, must have been under a shoestring,
perhaps a few inches only.
     BLUE IN THE FACE takes it title from the actors being urged to
talk until they are just that.  It has little in common with "Smoke"
save that its epicenter is "The Brooklyn Cigar Company," the corner
store managed by Auggie (Harvey Keitel).  The film might better be
called "All You Wanted To Know About Brooklyn and Never Thought of
Asking."
     Sometimes it feels like  "More About Brooklyn Than You Wanted to
Know." At other times it does not.
     BLUE IN THE FACE is a celebration of Brooklyn, its many racial
groups that presumably live in harmony (in the movie they go further,
into friendship), the nostalgia for the Dodgers whose departure hurt so
much, the ghost of Jackie Robinson, the need for retaining TBCC which
is more than just about tobacco, etc.  The statistics include the
number of potholes in Brooklyn.  We also get some new and old
documentary footage.
     BLUE IN THE FACE opens splendidly.  Outside TBCC, Auggie's
girlfriend (Mel Gorham) is talking a blue streak.  A twelve-year old
boy snatches the purse of a woman, is chased and caught by Auggie.  The
bleeding-heart snatchee (Mira Sorvino pre-"Mighty Aphrodite"), though
urged on by experienced, world-wise Auggie, will not press charges.
Disgusted, Auggie gives the purse back to the thief saying "Take it!"
The boy runs off.  Mira is livid with rage.
     Little of the hour-and-a-half is up to those standards.  People
come and go, mostly desultory talk takes place, characters reappear or
don't.  There is a strong climate of good fellowship.  A few sketches
work well, the others do not.
     This is the kind of movie that expands the medium, that you want
to like.  In one sense, it is a very, very distant cousin of talkfest
pictures like the chic METROPOLITAN or the studentish SLACKER.  Even
more distantly, it is a street version of the sophisticated MY DINNER
WITH ANDRE or the films of Eric Rohmer.  In another sense it is close
to e-mail chat, but with a much higher ratio of interesting to dull.
Still, there are arid stretches.
     Nice things do occur however.  Lou Reed, behind the counter at the
start and intermittently, addresses us on a whole mess of ideas,
beginning with the fact he's been leaving Brooklyn for 36 years.
     The end credits are followed by more film then by credits and then
by a heartfelt tribute to the late Jerry Garcia.  So don't walk out of
the theater until the lights come on.  In-between the best improviser
is Jim Jarmusch who goes to the TBCC to smoke his last cigarette and
talk with Auggie.
     What a difference a smart director-writer can make! Here, Jarmusch
could be a character in one of his own movies.  In his several
appearances he discourses humorouly on smoking, tells of his first
cigarette, the result of a robbery by his young friends in Akron, Ohio,
when he was twelve.  He tells of a friend who had his alarm clock wake
him up every four hours, so that he might have a smoke and go back to
sleep.
     Ever the film buff, Jarmusch describes actor Richard Conte in a
war movie where he plays an obsessive smoker.  We see a scene of that
old film.  Jarmusch also tells of the schoolboy interpretation of Lucky
Strike's LSMFT: "Loose Stomach Means Full Toilet," then laughs at the
absurd slogan "It's Toasted."
     He then wonders why, when a movie character's gun is emptied, he
throws the revolver away!  All the while--as well as in in some
sketches with other people--Keitel listens, adds some words, always
makes you feel that he is real and cares about those around him.
     Jarmusch is immediately identifiable.  Others, like Lily Tomlin
as a man, are not.  I had a problem recognizing Roseanne whom I first
took for a sleazy hooker.  Her acting is atrocious.  When she turns out
to be the wife of the store's owner (Victor Argo) she does a dumb
shtick from her TV programs about wanting to go to Las Vegas.
     Madonna, too, as a singing telegram messenger in a sluttish outfit
may cause a double-take as she looks way older than her then 35 years.
She is not amusing.
     Mel Gorham, as a Latino pepperpot, has one of the funniest lines.
She tells Auggie " I um goinggg  to make looove to you, I am goinggg to
ride you like a Beeeg Boool."
     I forget who the dummy is that out of the blue provides us with
this aberrant wisdom: "First you like somebody, then you kiss them,
then you do the dirty, and if you fall in love with them, you marry
someone else."
     Other "situations" can be be dull, but the better ones
compensate.  The novelty and brio of the film are not without charm.
     Sometimes, leftovers can make dishes even better than the
original.  Sometimes they cannot, but they are still worth eating.
"Blue in the Face" is like that.
     NOTE: The last segment is obviously a (welcome) afterthought.  Was
it added after the film was originally shown, as a piece In Memoriam
Jerry Garcia (August 1, 1942 - August 9, 1995)? I am told that it was
screened as "Coffee and Cigarettes" at the Telluride Festival, and that
it was the last video Garcia made.
     Oddly, Jim Jarmusch made "Coffee and Cigarettes" (short,1986),
then "Coffee and Cigarettes Part Two" (short, 1988), then "Coffee and
Cigarettes (Somewhere In California)" (1993).  I have seen at least two
of them, but I don't remember any of those being anything like the item
in "Blue."

Author
Christopher Null
     It took all of five days after wrapping the shoot of SMOKE to
create BLUE IN THE FACE, an (allegedly) all-improvised follow-up to
Wayne Wang and Paul Auster's feature centered on a tiny smoke shop in
Brooklyn.  It's a weird experiment in filmmaking, studded with cameos
by Lou Reed, Madonna, Michael J. Fox, Roseanne, Lily Tomlin, and more.
Unfortunately, you've probably seen all the funniest bits in the
movie's trailer.
     Separated into segments with titles like "Brooklyn Attitude," BLUE
IN THE FACE explores the Brooklyn mystique and the Brooklyn experience
with video interviews and impromptu sketches.  Everything "Brooklyn" is
praised, from Ebbets Field and Jackie Robinson to Belgian Waffles and
the sanctity of the local cigar store.
     A lot of this is hilarious:  Reed as the smoke shop
employee/eyeglass frame inventor who's been thinking about leaving the
city for 35 years; Jim Jarmusch as Bob, who is finally giving up his
Lucky Strikes; Fox in an insanely comical turn as a spontaneous social
analyst/psychologist; Mel Gorham as Violetta, Auggie's only partially
stable girlfriend.
     Holding the craziness together (sort of) is Auggie (Harvey Keitel)
and the Brooklyn Cigar Co. where he works.  When news that the store
has been sold arrives, Auggie does his best to change the owner's
(Victor Argo) mind, culminating in the appearance of the ghost of
Jackie Robinson, who convinces him the store should stay open.
     This is not your typical Hollywood fare.  It's not typical
*anything.*  Clocking in at about 76 minutes, BLUE IN THE FACE clearly
has the look and feel of a spontaneous collection of vignettes, some of
which work, and some of which don't.  It's worthwhile for the funny
bits, and the film isn't long enough to make you lose interest when it
drags.  I suppose it did what it was supposed to do (that is, give
everyone who wasn't in SMOKE something to do for a few afternoons).
You'll have to be the judge if that was a good idea or a bad one.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list
