Title
Review for Hard Drive (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
"Get a life", words spoken by Sharon Stone's character at
the end of SLIVER, might be a good advice to protagonist of
HARD DRIVE, 1994 erotic thriller directed by James
Marandino. That man is Will (played by Leo Damian), wealthy
Californian who never leaves house and spends all time in
front of the computer screen. Reason for that is his
obsession with on-line communications, namely those of the
sexual nature. Lately he developed on-line relationship with
mysterious woman named Delilah. They exchange their bizarre
sexual fantasies, and once Delilah suggests that they try
one of them in real life, Will agrees. However, this fantasy
is rather dark and in might not be as harmless in real life
as it is in cyberspace.
Made in a time when Internet only began to establish itself
as global phenomenon, this film tries to predict some of its
after-effects - alienation and addiction to cyberspace as
preferable form or reality. Unfortunately, when screenwriter
and lead actor Leo Damian tries to explore the ultimate
consequences of such alienation, HARD DRIVE begins to fall
apart. The story is stuffed with plenty of totally
unnecessary characters, although at least one of them,
Will's real life girlfriend Laura, is played by quite
capable Belinda Waymouth. Unfortunately, despite rather nice
photography by Sead Muhtarevic, HARD DRIVE in the end falls
apart because of cliches and director James Marandino's
inability to prevent confusion among the audience. Although
HARD DRIVE at least tries to deal with serious subjects, the
audience is left with the impression of failed effort, and
those subjects seem too lofty for unsuitable for something
so exploitative like erotic thriller.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
