Title
Review for Boys from Brazil, The (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
     The most intriguing thing about 'The Boys From Brazil' is that it keeps
you guessing how the plot will unfold.  It begins in South America and a
secret meeting is taking place.  A meeting held by Dr. Josef Mengele,
otherwise known as the "Angel of Death" and a former Nazi enforcer under the
command of Hitler himself during World War II.  
     The movie implies that he is still alive and he is played chillingly by
Gregory Peck.  Peck's interpretation of the role is a monologue of hatred for
those who oppose his ideas and arrogant superiority over those he wishes to
control.  It is a blinding and insane personality trait which Peck plays very
convincingly.  
     The meeting he is holding is with different men, some former officers of
the SS, young generation assassins and other evil conspirators.  A large
number of men are to be assassinated across the globe over a period of time
in order for Mengele's plan to work.  What the men at the meeting don't
realize is that their meeting is under surveillance by a young man (Steve
Guttenberg in one of his first roles) who intends to convey the recordings of
the meeting to a Nazi hunter (Laurence Olivier in an Oscar nominated role) in
the hopes of stopping Mengele and bringing him to justice. 
     After receiving a strange phone call from Guttenberg, Olivier finds in
the next little while that evidence begins to mount to support the claims
that the plot the SS intends to carry out is in fact becoming a reality.
 This leads Olivier on a world wide trip to find the truth.  He finds a
number of boys living in various parts of the world that all look exactly
alike and he discovers the Mengele has created clones of someone.
     In wake of the cloning of Dolly the sheep in Scotland in the past year,
you might want to take a look at 'The Boys From Brazil' to see how this
movie, which was dismissed as science fiction when it first came out in 1978,
has proven to be somewhat of a prophesy and although bans on human cloning
have been called for around the world, who knows?  It may have already
happened.
     Laurence Olivier is superb in his role and the film is directed by
Franklin J. Schaffner (Oscar winner for 'Patton' - 1970) and is based on the
novel by Ira Levin.  It doesn't try to be anything more than a low key
detective story with moments of heightened tension that show evil at its most
vindictive.  You will definitely be against cloning once you've seen 'The
Boys From Brazil'.
