Title
Review for Persuasion (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Amanda Root, Ciaran Hinds, Sophie Thompson, Samuel West,
      Simon Russell Beale, Phoebe Nicholls, Corin Redgrave
Director: Roger Michell
Producer: Fiona Finlay
Screenplay: Nick Dear based on the novel by Jane Austen
Cinematography: John Daly
Music: Jeremy Sams
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     Jane Austen, considered by many literary critics to be among the
first of the "modern" writers, is perhaps best known for creating
believable, strong-willed, independent female characters in an era when
women in books were often little more than window dressing or plot
devices.  Although remembered primarily for her alliterative titles,
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE and  SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, Austen authored six
major novels, including that upon which this film is based, PERSUASION.
     Those horrified by Roland Joffe's looser-than-loose
"interpretation" of Hawthorne's THE SCARLET LETTER will be overjoyed to
learn that cinematic faithfulness to classic novels is not a dead art.
Not only does PERSUASION remain true to Austen's story, but Nick Dear's
script, as brought to the screen by director Roger Michell, conveys a
sense of atmosphere and "feeling" that a less-adept adaptation might
lose.
     PERSUASION opens in early 19th century England (1814, to be
precise), in the wake of war with France.  Across the Channel, Napoleon
has abdicated and been confined to Elba, and British servicemen are
returning home.  Among them is Captain Frederick Wentworth (Ciaran
Hinds), a navy officer who has been away for more than eight years since
his marriage proposal to then-19-year old Anne Elliot (Amanda Root) was
refused.  Now, almost a decade later, Anne lives in a state of constant
regret, attempting to fill an empty life through her selfless devotion
to family and friends.  However, although she remains without either
husband or suitors, circumstances have decreed that she has not seen the
last of the one true love of her life.
     Even though the subject material of the film might sound like the
stuff of a Harlequin romance, PERSUASION has far greater depth than any
dime store soap opera.  The movie offers not only keen insights on the
lasting, and agonizing, effects of love, but explores the theme of
consequences.  While the hand of fate can be seen working throughout,
the characters' circumstances are ultimately the result of their own
choices and actions.  Anne is responsible for her unhappiness, and, when
an opportunity arises to redress her past error, she must seize it or
lose Frederick forever.  The barrier to overcome is the deep emotional
scarring created by her decision of eight years ago.
     To a lesser extent, PERSUASION also works as a social commentary.
The film takes aim at the pre-Victorian society in which it is set--a
social structure that encouraged the empty words of sycophants over true
expressions of friendship.  Many of the characters are cloaked in
artifice, and it's only as their real motives are uncovered that we
learn of their duplicity and superciliousness.  Michell uses some of
this shallowness to comic effect through the fatuous presentation of
characters like Anne's father (Corin Redgrave) and sister Elizabeth
(Phoebe Nichols).  It's men and women like this that draw our sympathy
towards those who are honest and straightforward, like Anne and
Frederick.
     The fine cast is populated by members of England's Royal
Shakespeare Company.  Amanda Root, who has the main role, is a
revelation with her natural manner of conveying complex emotions.
Root's most obvious assets are her expressive eyes, which display
everything from longing and pain to surprise and joy.  The actress
brings a captivating mix of dignity, charm, and willfulness to Anne.
Her co-star, Ciaran Hinds, illustrates Frederick's deeply-buried
torment, both when it's repressed and when it comes bubbling to the
surface.  These two actors command our attention, especially when they
share a scene.  Also, a few somewhat-familiar faces, like Sophie
Thompson, Corin Redgrave, and John Woodvine, have supporting parts.
     Occasionally in the past, I have compared British-produced period
pieces to episodes of PBS's MASTERPIECE THEATER.  In this case, it's
more than a comparison, since PERSUASION is due to be shown on that
program in 1996.  Like nearly all MASTERPIECE presentations, this one
boasts impeccable production values.  Its faithfulness to the source
material results in a few slow spots, but PERSUASION is nevertheless
fine entertainment.  And, at a time when most love stories involve
copious displays of skin, it's a rare pleasure to see so much emotion
brought to the screen by a single kiss.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Christopher Null
     Whew!  Sitting through 112 minutes of PERSUASION is a true
exercise in persistence.  Full of performances that could have been
done better by hand puppets, sloppy direction, and a script that's
nearly impossible to follow, PERSUASION has very little to redeem it.
     Pay close attention:  the story follows Anne Elliot (Amanda Root),
a prim and proper twenty-seven-year old in 1814 England.  Having once
turned down a proposal from Frederick Wentworth (Ciaran Hinds), he has
turned back up to try again.  Also in the picture are Anne's younger
sister Mary (Sophie Thompson), her husband (Simon Russell Beale), and
his sisters (Emma Roberts and Victoria Hamilton), both of whom
Wentworth chases after.  Not to mention Anne's cousin William (Samuel
West), who also chases after Anne in the hopes of getting his fingers
on her father's estate.  The story is based on the Jane Austen novel,
and as you hopefully can tell by this rousing description, it's about
as exciting as...a Jane Austen novel.
     To keep track of these totally bland and uninteresting blokes, the
producers were kind enough to throw in a handy genealogical chart to
help keep track of no fewer than 15 major characters.  Unfortunately,
you won't get one of these with your ticket, so you'll likely be
staring up at the screen in total confusion.  Even more unhelpful is
the costuming, of which two basic varieties are used:  male and
female.  And I've never seen so much *brown* in my life.
     Some fun costumes might have helped ease the pain of sitting
through PERSUASION, considering that all these dull people do is talk
and eat.  Amanda Root is being trumpeted by the producers as the next
Emma Thompson.  I don't think so, seeing how she spends the entire film
just gawking at things like a wide-eyed Chihuahua and then whining
about them.  Oh, and don't expect any grandiose Merchant-Ivory style
landscapes or ballrooms.  Instead, to break up the monotony of the
cramped sitting room settings, director Roger Michell opted for totally
inappropriate MTV-style moving camerawork to capture the sheer nothing
that is going on.
     I hope this is enough to dissuade you from bothering with
PERSUASION.  And I hope I'm not spoiling anything here, by giving away
the movie's final line of dialogue: "Anne?  Why would you want to
marry Anne?"  I'm still working on the answer to that one.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Anthony E. Wright
     Jane Austen is getting a Hollywood make-over.  She might have been
the ghostwriter for the summer hit CLUELESS, so closely did it follow
her book "Emma" scene-by-scene: it just transported the story into
present-day teen Valley culture.  Later this year, Merchant-Ivory
veteran Emma Thompson will add her star (and Oscar) power to a film
version of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
      Some Hollywood agent is probably calling on Steven Spielberg to
direct MANSFIELD PARK, starring Jeff Goldblum, Laura Dern, and
computer-animated aristocrats.  With all this movie-making, the BBC
arthouse productions of Austen's work might get lost in the shuffle.
That would be a mistake for both Austen fans and neophytes.
     PERSUASION is opening nationally after its one-theater run in
Manhattan, with its adaptation of what some Austen fans believe is her
best novel, bursting with romantic tensions and incisive social
commentary.  There's little Hollywood glitz here: The scenery is
pleasing and real.  The language is understandable but retains its
clever wit.  And while attractive, the characters much more plain than
the perfect creations that movies usually attempt to claim as real
people.  Little makeup is used: No one would mistake this for one of
those dressed-up Merchant-Ivory galas.  Narratively, we see how truly
dreary being English aristocrat can be.  The houses are silent except
for the creaking floor boards.  Rooms are lit with only sunlight or
candles.  The directing capitalizes on these aspects for good effect:
The camera actually rocks with the movement of a ship, or the bustle of
a horse-drawn carriage.  We get the full ride, with the bumps
included.
     Those familiar with PERSUASION be forewarned: while this film
attempts to capture the spirit of the book, many details were deemed
expendable.  The basic story remains intact, but scenes are switched
around, dropped, and even tweaked.  The movie changes some of the
action to make plot points stronger.  It even draws from early drafts
of the book--so some Austen lovers might be needlessly concerned about
the eventual outcome.  Yet even the most rabid Austen fanatics will be
pleased by the movie.  Those who don't remember reading "Pride and
Prejudice" and the like in high school might need a little coaching and
careful viewing in the first half to get all the characters and
relationships straight, but the experience is still worth it.
     The story focuses on Anne, the white sheep of a ludicrous
aristocratic family, when she meets up with Captain Wentworth, a sailor
whose hand she was persuaded to spurn, by her friends and family
concerned by his lack of money.  Although now he has come back from the
wars a rich man, and she has become more independent to boot.  But
getting the two together still requires a lot of maneuvering.  Anne is
the protagonist that we like: A literate, unpretentious lady that even
deigns to visit with friends below her on the class scale, which
predictably rewards her with valuable gossip later in the story.
     The acting between these two main characters gets at some of the
romantic tensions that light up the book....  The (perhaps too) frequent
close-up of Ann's wide eyes are remarkable, because with only a twitch
they convey her longing and amazement at her predicament.  Most
everyone else does well portraying the silly characters that Austen
created.  In fact, the moviemakers were generous: director Austen might
have made the characters more ridiculous.
     But besides the story of romance, the social satire is biting.  To
our amusement, we see the stultifying boredom and pointlessness when
the family give a courtesy call to a well-connected relative.  Anne
talks with a friend about the difference between "good company"--an
obsession among the aristocrats--and the "best company," for which Anne
has a fairly different criteria.  When an associate makes a point by
referring to the women characters in novels, Anne pointedly reminds him
that the novels are written by men.  Even just the cruelty of it all is
portrayed:  when discussing the family finances, her absurd, vain
father exclaims, "Ask Anne? Whatever for?"
     Perhaps the only problem is that social satire of another century
is similar to a day-old wedding cake: it still looks beautiful, and one
can appreciate the craftsmanship, but to some it loses a delicate touch
that makes it so tasty.  Yet when leaving the Paris Theater in downtown
Manhattan, one is immediately greeted with the horse-drawn carriages
running along the base of Central Park; the historic Plaza Hotel,
perhaps the most expensive lodgings this side of England; FAO Schwartz,
the literal playground of the rich; and around the corner, Trump Tower,
the most visible symbol that if Jane Austen were a screenwriter today,
she would have a lot of material to work with.  Despite Hollywood, we
may need her now more than ever.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     PERSUASION is a perfect movie.  It is based on Jane Austin's
probably least well known novel, which was published posthumously.  I
have never read it so the story was totally fresh.  On the other hand,
this movie is so good that if I had read the book a thousand times, I
would still have left me awe struck by the acting and the production.
I do hope all of the Academy members see this show.  It deserves awards
in a myriad of categories.
     PERSUASION tells the story of a large number of people in several
families, but at the heart it is the story of Anne Elliot (Amanda
Root).  Root is a British Shakespearean actress, and this is her first
film.  It is one of the most auspicious beginnings for a movie actress
I can remember.  She is simply incredible.  She is an actress on the
plain side of homely who transforms every scene she is in into a
magical moment and yet she spends most of the movie just listening and
giving the most expressive, pensive, frequently sad, but always
compelling expressions I can remember.  All she need do is look into
the camera with her big dark eyes, and she owns the scene.  She says
more by saying nothing than most actresses do with a whole movie full
of dialog.
     PERSUASION is set in England in 1814 as the first Napoleonic war
has just ended.  Anne Elliot's family lives on a large estate, but have
to move out since they are broke.  Against her father's, Sir Walter
Elliot (Corin Redgrave), desires he agrees to rent their home to the
riff raff of a navy family who are not of noble birth.
     The navy family, lead by a war hero, Admiral Croft (John
Woodvine), come and are gracious to Ann even though there is an old
secret.  It seems that eight years earlier, a nineteen year old Ann, on
the advice of Lady Russell (Susan Fleetwood), turned down a proposal of
marriage by one of the Admiral's sons.  Ann lived in misery after that,
lamenting the decision.  Lady Russell consoles her by saying that her
suitor at the time had "no fortune, no connections.  It was entirely
prudent of you to reject him."  The foundation of the story is
unrequited love, lost opportunities, and subdued passion.  If it
reminded me of any movie it was probably the unforgettable THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE.
     Sir Elliot and his other daughter Elizabeth (Phoebe Nicholls - who
was so excellent as Cordelia Flyte in "Brideshead Revisited") leave for
Bath and cheaper lodgings.  Ann leaves The Admiral and his wife (Fiona
Shaw) to visit her cousins the Musgroves: Charles Musgrove (Simon
Russell Beale), his wife (Judy Cornwell), and their sons and daughters.
The Musgroves are a household of would be social climbers.  When they
hear that the Admiral's son, the famous Captain Frederick Wentworth
(Ciaran Hinds), will visit then them, their life goes on hold.  When
one of the sons inconveniently breaks his collar bone and may be
paralyzed for life, they go to the welcoming party for the Captain
anyway and ask Ann to nurse their son who is in shock.  The story takes
numerous twists and turns from there.
     The script by Nick Dear, based on the Austin novel, is full of
memorable lines, but the great direction by first time director Roger
Mitchell relies more on silence and on expressions than on the words to
carry the emotion of the tale.  The raciest lines are when Ann's cousin
Mr. Elliot (Samuel West) is trying to woe her.  She says, "You presume
to know me", and he replies, "In my heart I know you intimately."  We
also have, a la THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, an extremely effective brief hand
holding scene.  The height of passion is reached in the show with a
single, quick kiss.  Fast it may be, the effect is total.
     Besides Root's acting, which should put her on the short list for
an Oscar, the performance by Hinds is almost as good.  In fact, all of
the rest of the cast are excellent.  There is not even a mediocre
performance.
     The craft of the movie itself is phenomenal.  If John Daly does
not win an award for his cinematography then the entire Academy must be
blind.  Never has candle lit scenes been more effectively and lovingly
done.  Watch the extreme length of the candle flames and how the camera
shots through and around them.  Daly's technique of shooting indoor
scenes closer up than normal gives an intimacy and presence that I have
not seen before.  In scenes that normally would have been filmed
further back, like the ones of the indoor dancing, he uses handheld
cameras and stays in tight on the faces and even uses panning without
making the audience dizzy.  Several times he lets the camera linger on
a person photographic style even when the character has no speaking
parts.
     The set decoration (William Dudley) and especially the costumes
(Alexandra Byrne) deserve awards.  They add to the movie enormously
without the usual in your face period pieces that are overdone.  There
are many fine examples of this but my favorite is the clothes and
especially the navy hat that the captain sometimes wears.  The look
tells us more about his character than many pages of dialog would have.
The music (Jeremy Sams) is well done with the best being the frequent
use of the harpsichord.  The make up artist is extremely talented.
Watch carefully for the subtle but important changes in Ann's makeup as
the story develops.
     Although there are tragedies in the movie that will take your
breath away, the story is one mainly of carefully controlled and
checked emotions.  Finally, the movie ends as well as it begins.  The
last line is by Ann's father.  I can not use it here as it gives away a
key fact, but it is a perfect statement to his obliviousness and an
excellent end to the story.
     PERSUASION runs a perfectly edited (Kate Evans) 1:43.  It is a G
movie that is rated PG since it will probably bore kids under 8.  There
is absolutely nothing in it to offend anyone of any age.  I most
strongly recommend this movie to you, and I give it my rarely awarded
top rating of ****.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 19, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
