Title
Review for Mom and Dad Save the World (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)

Author
Frank Maloney
     The following are not full-scale reviews per se, but rather short
notices of two films I've seen recently: BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER and
MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD.
########################################################
     BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER was directed by Fran Rubel Kazui, from a
script by Joss Whedon, and stars Kristy Swanson, Donald Sutherland, Paul
Rubens, Rutger Hauer, and Luke Perry.  Kazui (TOKYO POP) has given us a
occult black comedy on a shoestring budget -- only one of the points of
contrast with DEATH BECOMES HER, which opened the same weekend.  Since
there was no money for the usual f/x hijinks we associate with vampire
movies in general, Kazui concentrates on his characters' comic
possibilities.  The result is spotty at best, but BUFFY has its moments
and the overall effect is charming to viewers who approach it with a
minimum of expectations.  Swanson has the valley girl thing down, even
if the whole phenomenon is ten years out of date.  But still she's
energetic and gives it her all.  Donald Sutherland as her mentor is
probably walking through the part and cashing his check before it
bounces; but it is always good to see Sutherland on the screen even in a
walk-through.  Rutger Hauer did not strike me as a very sinister head
vampire.  However, Paul Rubens as his go-fer was slightly wonderful,
probably the best thing about this flick; I appreciated the fact that he
was made up to look like his mug shot, and his death scene was amusingly
drawn out and tentative.  On the other hand Luke Perry pretty much
proved he had better be investing his TV salary, because he has a very
limited future in the movies; he was utterly flat and without screen
presence, something Swanson had in abundance.
     In the words of "The Hitchhiker's Guide," BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER
is mostly harmless, a no-brainer kind of mid-afternoon retreat to a
cheap matinee from the harsh reality of August.  Or better yet, rent the
video next winter.  It will warm your cockles a little.
##################################################
     MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD was directed by Greg Beeman, from a
script by Chris Matheson and Ed Solomon, and starred Teri Garr, Jeffrey
Jones, and Jon Lovitz, with Wally Shawn, the late Thalmus Rasalala,
Dwier Brown, and Kathy Ireland; it is rated PG.
     This is another mostly harmless, brainless confection that wins
through with energy, determination, and good will.  The set and costumes
are heavily retro, equally influenced by BRAZIL and ROAD WARRIOR and THE
WIZARD OF OZ, by Las Vegas and Bugsy Siegal, by Antonio Gaudi and
Dr. Seuss and Liberace.  The effect is the kind of campiness that is
easy to take and easy to forget later on in the day.  It makes a few
mistakes -- the fish women and dog men are particularly ill-advised --
but the casting of Garr and Jones as the title characters was inspired.
It is they who save the movie, as much as the World.  They are cheerful
and dynamic and infectious in their willingness to cooperate with the
silly proceedings.  Wally Shawn has a small part as a kindly torturer,
Rasafala looks properly uncomfortable, Jon Lovitz is much funnier in A
LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, Dwier Brown and Kathy Ireland easy on the eyes in
their skimpy outfits that match their mentalities (actually, Brown was
thoroughly funny while being dense in an almost Pythonesque way), and
there is an uncredited cameo of some note (see the spoiler at the bottom
for the identity of the mystery guest).
     This is another candidate for a cheap matinee or for video viewing
later on this year.  I think some of you may be gently entertained; I
was.
     The cameo appearance was by Bill Murray officiating at the wedding.
A rather funny little role, made funnier by a hair-do right out
Munchkinland.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:26, PG, Comedy, 1992
Director: Greg Beeman
Cast: Teri Garr, Jeffrey Jones, Jon Lovitz, Dwier Brown, Kathy Ireland,
      Thalmus Rasulala, Wallace Shawn, Eric Idle
     Jon Lovitz, the ruler of a planet of idiots, is going to destroy
Earth.  He sees Teri Garr, an Earth woman, and has Garr and her husband
Jeffrey Jones brought up to his planet.  Lovitz has Jones imprisoned and
tries to marry Garr.  Jones escapes from prison and has to save Garr and
the Earth.
     Given the comic talent in MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD, it could have
been a lot better than it turned out.  However, that doesn't mean that
this film is a waste of time because it is far from that.  This film
will only be liked by those who enjoy "stupid" comedies.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD a four with reservations
(a 3.5).  MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD is rated PG for adult situations
and violence.
     Jon Lovitz (A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, MR. DESTINY) is not at his best
in this film.  He was better in almost any of his appearances in the old
episodes of "Saturday Night Live".  Jeffrey Jones (STAY TUNED,
BEETLEJUICE) carries most of this film.  He does a great job.  Teri Garr
(TOOTSIE, CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND) gives a reasonably good
performance.  Kathy Ireland (NATIONAL LAMPOON'S LOADED WEAPON 1,
MR. DESTINY) is great.  Wallace Shawn (THE PRINCESS BRIDE, SHADOWS AND
FOG) is disappointing.  I expected much better from him.  Eric Idle
(NATIONAL LAMPOON'S EUROPEAN VACATION, MONTY PYTHON'S THE MEANING OF
LIFE) is the best actor in this film.  This film is worth seeing just
for him.  The various creatures in this film are also great, especially
the ones that live in the sewers.
     As I mentioned earlier, MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD is a "stupid"
comedy.  It starts out slowly, but about one-fourth of the way through
the film starts to pick up and doesn't slow back down.  This film is
basically well written.  It is not in the league of such films  as HOT
SHOTS!, NATIONAL LAMPOON'S LOADED WEAPON 1, or THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE
SMELL OF FEAR.  If any children are around, they will love this film.
