Title
Review for Menace II Society (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Baumgarten
[ Phans -- After some thought, I've decided to write some non-horror
reviews as myself, rather than as the Phantom.  It's likely that the
majority will be about action and/or exploitation films, from
CLIFFHANGER (in the works) to SLIVER (which I took a pass on).  It's
also likely that since many of these films won't be as downright awful
as LEPRECHAUN, the reviews probably won't be as funny.  I may get tired
of semi-serious reviewing, in which case I'll switch to direct-to-video
releases or something like that, since there aren't going to be many
horror releases this summer.  Happy reading, and I'll try to live up to
the high standards set by my alter ego.  SBB ]
     I don't know who the Hughes Brothers are, but I sincerely hope
they continue to make films as good as MENACE II SOCIETY, the latest in
a series of impressive debuts by new black directors.  Like many
low-budget filmmakers, they chose to write (with Tyger Williams) and
direct an urban coming-of-age film, part drama, part exploitation, and
part "message" film.
     When making an urban "message" film, you walk a fine line between
producing little more than a big-budget ABC After School Special, or an
exploitation film that's ultimately as unsatisfying as it is
entertaining.  Recently, we've had both: John Singleton's BOYZ N THE
HOOD and Ernest Dickerson's JUICE played out as entertaining, well-made
urban dramas that deal with the challenges black youth face growing up
in a city like Los Angeles.  Singleton proved that he was a capable
filmmaker and benefited greatly from a standout performance by the
rapper Ice Cube; Dickerson showed us why Spike Lee has used no one else
as his cinematographer.  On an emotional level, BOYZ N THE HOOD was
quite powerful -- partly because it was the first mainstream Hollywood
film to deal with these issues in a serious way, and partly because of
the performances Singleton was able to get from his young cast.  JUICE
was entertaining for as long as it remained on the screen, but after
that it became instantly forgettable.  It ultimately failed because
Dickerson didn't know whether he wanted to make an exploitation film
(in the mold of NEW JACK CITY) or a "message" film that would at least
help redeem the film's violent tone.  In attempting to make both, he
really made neither, though his cinematographer's eye was largely
responsible for the film's glossy and very attractive look.
     (As a pure exploitation film, NEW JACK CITY was hampered only by
the occasional bout of moralizing; it seems that either black
filmmakers are not yet comfortable making films as mindlessly violent
as those of white filmmakers, or they feel that mainstream audiences
won't feel as comfortable with such films.  Either way, it's a recent
development, as we are not yet too far removed in time from the heyday
of the "blaxploitation" film, when the only goal filmmakers had was to
churn out entertaining product as quickly as possible, before the fad
collapsed.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY comes to us with an award from Cannes, which
indicates that the Hughes Brothers (as they bill themselves) are as
lucky as they are talented, this being a time when violent films are
held in high esteem at that august festival.  It's been my opinion for
a while that the judges at Cannes wouldn't know a good film if it
leaped at them out of their popcorn boxes, but then again my definition
of "good" is closely tied to my definition of "entertaining".  I'm much
less interested in getting "messages" from the films I see than I am in
being entertained in ways that novels, plays, and television cannot
duplicate.  Films without messages are hard to come by these days, but
again, that's a recent development:  just two decades ago the silver
screen was awash in graphic violence for the sake of violence, and
films like A CLOCKWORK ORANGE and THE WILD BUNCH were considered
mainstream.  That RESERVOIR DOGS -- a film very much in the Peckinpah
mold -- would cause the uproar it did, now 25 years later, shows you
just how far we've regressed since the glory days of filmmaking freedom
in the late sixties and early seventies.
     But under the cloak of The Message, the Hughes Brothers have
assembled a film that's as entertaining as it is well-crafted, and one
that has much more depth to it than any other recent urban film.  Its
story is familiar, following as it does the life of one black teenager
as he grows up in a family, a neighborhood, and among friends who do
all they can to force him into making one bad decision after another.
That some of these decisions will have lethal consequences is a
foregone conclusion, but the genius of MENACE II SOCIETY is that it
does not allow us to fall into the comfortable trap of complete
identification with a totally sympathetic protagonist.  As disturbing
as BOYZ N THE HOOD was, we never had to deal with the possibility that
Cuba Gooding Jr.'s character would turn out to be something other than
he was on the surface: a bright, well-intentioned, likable kid who gets
caught up with a crowd of "bad" friends.
     But that possibility lies at the center of the Hughes Brothers'
film; what keeps MENACE II SOCIETY interesting is its ability to keep
us off balance as it presents us with several inter-connected slices of
life.  Although it has all the trappings of another coming-of-age film,
there's more going on in MENACE II SOCIETY than meets the eye.  It is,
at heart, a darker film than BOYZ N THE HOOD; it is also in a number of
ways a better made film.  (This is true especially in the mechanics of
filmmaking, where the Hughes Brothers' background as directors of
hip-hop and rap music videos occasionally shines through and keeps
their film as interesting visually as it is on other, deeper levels.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY starts on a jittery note: after a brief title
sequence, we're pulled into the middle of a situation in a Korean
grocery that seems about to go very wrong.  Any violent scene can be
used to shock an audience out of its complacency, but where other
filmmakers have used urban violence to do little more than show us how
terrible such violence is, the Hughes Brothers use it as well to ground
us in the everyday life of Caine (the story's protagonist and the
character with whom we'd most like to identify) and his volatile
side-kick O-Dog.  Too, the scene is used to show us how such violence
affects Caine and his friends, because as compelling as the scene is
initially, it only gains power as the Hughes Brothers return to it,
time and again, as the film's touchstone.
     Although the film seems at first to be constructed as a running
narration by Caine about the events he experiences as he approaches the
end of his senior year in high school, the documentary style is just
one of many the Hughes Brothers use throughout the film.  In fact, the
most powerful scenes are those that provide background for the events
that unfold in Caine's life; in particular, a flashback to Caine's
troubled childhood works on several levels: it is so well done it
nearly stands on its own as a movie within a movie, yet by giving us a
chance to live Caine's life as he did, it allows us to see why many of
his actions as a young adult make sense to him, even if we'd like to
believe that he is simply responding to recent events in his life in a
way that society finds unacceptable.  There are also scenes in this
film that reminded me of another of my favorite slice-of-life dramas,
though one of a very different kind.  On more than one occasion, the
Hughes Brothers' ability to present shocking events as hardly out of
the ordinary recalled John McNaughton's brilliant horror film HENRY:
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.  These scenes -- most involving the very
unstable O-Dog -- each have relatively little impact on us, but
collectively they paint the kind of portrait that straight exposition
cannot.  It's a very effective technique, but one that is rarely used
in mainstream films, both because it requires a sure and subtle touch,
and because its use implies that the filmmakers respect their audience
-- all of which is sadly lacking in Hollywood these days.
     Such scenes also point out the only real flaw in this film: that
while we're given a certain amount of insight into Caine, other
characters exist as mere ciphers.  We really don't know why O-Dog is
the way he is; perhaps that's the Hughes Brothers' point -- that for
every Caine who might be reached and turned away from self-destruction,
there will always be others who can't be.
     It's a hard lesson to absorb, for Caine and for us.  By the end of
the film, we're still unsure whether Caine will be able to change his
life and escape from the consequences of his past.  Endings are always
the most difficult part of a film to get right, and it's to the Hughes
Brothers' credit that they are able to tell a story that neither leaves
us bereft of hope nor expecting a fairy tale ending.  They are almost
always in control of their tightly constructed, 90 minute film -- one
of the few films I've seen recently that was exactly the right length,
a rarity in an age of bloated running times when "more" is often
mistaken for "better" -- and its brief tour of one troubled young man's
life not only leaves us entertained, but gives us something to think
about without patronizing us.  The screenplay (such as it is -- it's my
understanding that the excellent cast improvised large portions of many
scenes) is as pared down and well-crafted as the direction.  We're
spared maudlin soliloquies, montages, and all the other cinematic
crutches used by filmmakers who, lacking a central vision, a good
screenplay, talented actors, or all three, must fall back on overused
dramatic techniques to move the film along.
     (One note about the graphic violence in the film: I've seen
reviews that claim that MENACE II SOCIETY contains some of the
bloodiest and most unsettling violence ever shown in a commercial
film.  It does not.  It does, however, attempt to portray violence in a
realistic fashion -- something that is all too rare in a commercial
film.  To me, films like TOTAL RECALL and ROBOCOP 2 are far more
unsettling, if only because they couple graphic violence with an
unrelenting mean-spiritedness and place it all in a comic-book context
that's designed to appeal to children.  I personally find it sad that
reviewers would comment unfavorably on the violence in a film like
MENACE II SOCIETY -- one in which violence is used only to advance the
story, not *as* the story -- and remain largely silent when they have a
chance to condemn films that not only glorify graphic violence, but
revel in scene after scene in which one character inflicts pain on
another.  While there are graphic scenes in MENACE II SOCIETY, the film
itself never once depicts it as anything other than unfortunate result
of generations of unfortunate decisions.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY is easily one of the best films to be released
this spring, and as summer's deluge of big-budget, sloppily-made and
violence-glorifying films draws nearer, it would be a shame if anyone
overlooked a film as intelligent and well-made as this one.  We can
only hope that the Hughes Brothers achieve some measure of success and
recognition with their fine debut effort; although it's rarely the
case, this time it's true: MTV's loss is very much our gain.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  5/26/93
Running Length:  1:37
Rated:  R (Language, violence, sexual situations, mature themes))
     As a child, Caine (Tyrin Turner) was raised in a "den of thieves,"
with a heroin-addicted mother and a gun-toting, drug-pushing father.
At the age of five, Caine learns how to shoot a gun and witnesses his
father kill someone in cold blood.  By the time of his high school
graduation, he's already a seasoned drug pusher.  One night, he and his
friend O-Dog (Larenz Tate) go into a store to get a beer.  O-Dog takes
exception to a remark made by the owner and, with Caine standing by his
side, guns the man down.  From this point on, the pair start down a
road of crime that nothing can rescue them from--not even the fear of
death.  In fact, when Caine's grandfather asks him if he wants to stay
alive, his response is, "I don't know."
     This will not be the only review written that compares MENACE II
SOCIETY to BOYZ 'N THE HOOD, but it may be the only one to liken the
movie to RESERVOIR DOGS.  As I see it, there are definite similarities
between the Hughes Brother's film and those of Singleton and
Tarantino.
     The setting of MENACE and BOYZ is the same and the overwhelming
specter of explosive violence hangs over both.  Each in its own way is
a powerful indictment of what life has become for a black man in the
inner city and how the only escape through violence is into the grave.
While BOYZ 'N THE HOOD has as its main characters a couple of "good"
kids, MENACE II SOCIETY focuses on the other side.  Caine and O-Dog are
criminals, given to using their guns to solve problems.  Nevertheless,
they are portrayed sympathetically and the audience comes to understand
and even care about Caine, even though it's impossible to endorse his
actions.  Hence the comparison to RESERVOIR DOGS, a movie that, among
other things, had a group of murdering thugs as its main characters,
and whose success depended on the audience making an emotional
connection with the villains.
     MENACE II SOCIETY has a number of lessons to teach, all of which
are delivered without the whiff of a sermon.  The story and characters
are well-developed and we get to see graphically the wages of the kind
of life that Caine and O-Dog have chosen.  The lure of money, prestige,
and power are realistically presented, but no moreso than the brutal
payment that is exacted to obtain them.  Also at issue is the necessity
of a person accepting the consequences for his actions and how an
apparently inconsequential event can trigger a disastrous
chain-reaction.
     This is one of the most devastating movies to come along in a
while.  Few films these days have the power to keep an audience sitting
in stunned silence for the first few seconds of the final credits.
This, if nothing else, is testimony to how hard-hitting the conclusion
of MENACE is.  The movie pulls no punches, and for that reason, some
viewers may be offended.  The gory results of violence are displayed
with little concern for the sensibilities of the less-hardened members
of the audience, and the explicit language earns MENACE II SOCIETY its
"R" rating before the opening New Line Cinema logo leaves the screen.
     For MENACE II SOCIETY to work, the characters have to be real.
Especially in the case of Caine, into whose youth we are given a
lingering look, they are.  Equal credit must go to the writer and the
actors.  Except for Charles S. Dutton, whose role is little more than a
two-scene cameo, none of the performers are well-known, but there isn't
a stiff in the bunch.  The Hughes Brothers obviously knew what they
wanted before going out and getting it.
     Frankly, this is not an enjoyable movie.  It's too stark and
powerful to function as simple entertainment.  Those that set foot in a
darkened theater showing MENACE II SOCIETY should prepare for something
in the nature of an experience.  It won't be a fun time, but you'll sit
through ninety-seven minutes that won't quickly be forgotten.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
