Title
Review for Widows' Peak (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
eye WEEKLY
     A widow's peak is what you'd usually call that little dart of hair
pointing down to your eyebrows--Count Floyd had a serious one, for
example--but in the case of John Irvin's new film, WIDOWS' PEAK, is a
place.  A literally named place, too: a hill overlooking a small Irish
town named Kilshannon, upon which are situated a number of houses
solely inhabited by a gaggle of widows.
     Of these assorted widows, one takes precedence.  The formidable
Mrs. Doyle-Counihan (Joan Plowright) is a well-to-do matriarch who
does not suffer fools gladly, not even her rather foolish son Godfrey
(Adrian Dunbar), the only man permitted to live up on Widows' Peak.
Godfrey is a highly eligible bachelor, mostly because he is virtually
the sole candidate.
     Mrs. Doyle-Counihan's chief amusement, in addition to keeping
tabs on the community, is being driven about Widows' Peak and
Kilshannon in her regal Rolls-Royce, piloted by her salty,
cigar-smoking female chauffeur (chauffeuse?).  Mrs. D-C waves airily
at the villagers as if she were the Queen--which, in Widows' Peak, she
is.
     Let's see now.  There's only one other outsider (Godfrey is an
outsider because of his sex) allowed to live in the otherwise
widow-dense village: the quietly mysterious and oddly
vulnerable-seeming, penniless, middle-aged spinster Miss O'Hare (Mia
Farrow).  Everyone seems to keep a motherly eye on Miss O'Hare, for
reasons that are unclear for quite a long time.
     Be patient, now--just a teeny little more plot.  Miss O'Hare
suddenly starts receiving the courtship overtures of Clancy, the town's
dentist (Jim Broadbent).  Into this not very volatile mix comes, all
the way from America, the glamorous war-widow Edwina Broome (Natasha
Richardson).  Slim and sleek in her creamy Chanel suits, capped teeth
as white as tiny refrigerator doors, lips as red as a wicked witch's
apple, hats as wide as open umbrellas, her blonde hair tumbling down
from her hairpins just often enough to make your chest tighten whenever
it happens--she's lovely, is Mrs.  Broome (a new Broome sweeps clean),
and really, she's too much for Widows' Peak.
     She's certainly too much for Miss O'Hare, who appears to despise
her (Mrs. Broome appears to despise her back).  And when Godfrey
predictably falls in love with the beautiful Americanized English
widow, she's almost too much for the redoubtable Mrs. Doyle-Counihan.
     So then this is ENCHANTED APRIL again?  All cloche hats (this is
the '20s), champagne, beautiful motor cars, flirting and shy,
gentlemanly declarations of affection?
     No, WIDOWS' PEAK is a mystery story.  A funny, charming, witty
mystery story, murder and mirth in equal measure.
     Now this is difficult to manage.  So difficult that, as delightful
as much of WIDOWS' PEAK is, there is a lot of warping and distorting of
the action and even of the nature of the personalities involved in
order for the mystery to happen.  The script of WIDOWS' PEAK--which is
that increasing rarity, an original work--is by Irish writer Hugh
Leonard.  Leonard is a clever bloke--he's a novelist and playwright as
well as a screenwriter and prolific writer of fodder for television.
His best known work is probably his play DA, a considerable success on
Broadway in 1978 (where it won Leonard a Tony Award).
     Having established Leonard's cleverness, it must now be said that
WIDOWS' PEAK is just a little bit too clever.  Sure, the plot is
devious enough to keep you happily befuddled until the very end--which
is nice--but when you look back over the journey, it all seems pretty
incredible.  In fact the more you ponder it, the more unsatisfying and
unlikely the whole thing becomes.  In the end, it's the charm you go
for, not the revelation.
     One of the problems lies in the casting.  Natasha Richardson and
Joan Plowright seem fine (Natasha's accent wavers all over the place
but then I guess it's supposed to), but Mia Farrow feels wrong.
Originally, back in the early '80s when Hugh Leonard was trying to get
WIDOWS' PEAK produced, there was talk of Farrow and her mother, Maureen
O'Sullivan, taking the parts of Mrs. Broome and Miss O'Hare
respectively.  And now Mia plays the part originally intended for her
mater.  Quel irony.
     The trouble is--and it's a kind of tribute to Mia Farrow's
enduring ingenue good looks--that she doesn't look old enough or act
old enough to be this impecunious middle-aged spinster.  Wearing a
mothy old cardigan with holes in it is not a sufficient indication of
genteel poverty.  And she's much too perky to seem the age she's
playing.
     Then again, I cannot abide Mia Farrow's acting under scarcely any
circumstances at all.  For me, she's ruined every Woody Allen film
she's been in except for BROADWAY DANNY ROSE and HUSBANDS AND WIVES
(where she was expected to be as flat and two-dimensional as she
otherwise always is).  And here in WIDOWS' PEAK, La Farrow is flat,
tremulous and vague--with that trademark look of utter vacuity in her
eyes that frequently seems to get mistaken for depth of feeling or
something.  Anyhow, WIDOWS' PEAK would fare better without her.
     Director John Irvin, best known probably as an action director for
such films as HAMBURGER HILL (1986), GHOST STORY (1981) and Arnold
Schwarzenegger's RAW DEAL (1985), does well enough with WIDOWS' PEAK,
proving that, despite being saddled with Ms Farrow, he can still muster
a light touch.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)             Archives: ftp.io.org gopher.io.org 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WIDOWS' PEAK is a quirky little Irish comedy and mystery from the
director (John Irvin) of Turtle Diary.  It features Mia Farrow as the
mysteriously angry, local Irish woman who is convinced that the
mysterious new English/American stranger, played by Natasha Richardson
is "up to murder".
     The town is populated by rich widows who live on a hill nicknamed
WIDOWS' PEAK.  Joan Plowright plays the matriarch of the women.  All of
the poor folks live down in the town except for poor widow Farrow who
mysteriously lives on the peak.  Adrian Dunbar is Plowright's son, and
he falls head over hills in love with the new stranger.
     The movie is pure fluff.  It is rated PG.  They said one mild four
letter word I think to avoid getting the kiss of death of a G rating
which most theatergoers thinks means that adults must be accompanied by
a child under the age of 6 to attend and must turn off their brain on
entering.
     Mia Farrow and Natasha Richardson are both a delight to watch.
Just quirky enough but never overacting.  Lots of great Irish scenery
in the movie so if you get bored, just ignore the actors and watch the
cinematography (Ashley Rowe) of the Irish countryside and town.
     There is frankly not much in the movie.  The mystery is fun, but
pretty lightweight.  It has a nice ending which is sort of easy to
guess.  The script (Hugh Leonard) is lightweight but with a few good
laughs.
     WIDOWS' PEAK runs about right at 1:41.  It is correctly rated PG
and kids over about 8 may like it.  I give it a mild thumbs up and rate
it ** 1/2.  It never offends, rarely bores, and is a pleasant
diversion.  A relaxing, simple, feel good movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mia Farrow, Joan Plowright, Natasha Richardson,
           Adrian Dunbar, Jim Broadbent.
Screenplay:  Hugh Leonard.
Director:  John Irvin.
     I can't think of a film in the last few years set in Ireland that
I did not enjoy, and I'm fairly sure it's not coincidence.  When an
Irish setting is involved, I tend to lose all objectivity.  It's me
Celtic roots crying out, it is.  The verdant hills, the piqued accents,
the mystical Catholicism ... all grip me in a way that is difficult to
explain.  So I warn ye to take my comments regarding WIDOWS' PEAK with
a certain grain of salt, even though I believe that you don't need to
be a Celtophile to find it a wonderfully entertaining comedy-mystery.
     Set in 1926, WIDOWS' PEAK is the story of a unique community of
Kilshannon, Ireland, so nicknamed by the locals because of its rather
restrictive demographics.  The mother of Mrs. Doyle Counihan (Joan
Plowright) left a will permitting only widows to live in the houses on
her land, with special exceptions allowed like that for Miss Katherine
O'Hare (Mia Farrow).  Into this insular world comes Mrs. Edwina Broome
(Natasha Richardson), a flamboyant Englishwoman raised in America.
Although Mrs. Broome claims to be the widow of a wealthy English
soldier, Miss O'Hare is very vocal in her suspicions that Mrs. Broome
is not what she claims to be, particularly when Mrs. Broome begins
romancing Mrs. Doyle Counihan's son Godfrey (Adrian Dunbar).  The feud
between the two women escalates until scandalous secrets come to the
fore, and the town is filled with talk of murder.
     WIDOWS' PEAK was directed by John Irvin, whose previous projects
have been primarily action-oriented (RAW DEAL, HAMBURGER HILL), and it
may be that sensibility which makes this film more than just another
pastoral romp.  While there is plenty of lovely scenery, there is also
a tremendous level of energy, a sassy edge uncommon to films in similar
settings.  A sequence involving Miss O'Hare and Mrs. Broome racing
across a lake on motorboats is staged with zest, and the town regatta
seems genuinely alive with activity.  The high spirits are further
enhanced by the performances.  Joan Plowright is wonderful as the
dowager queen of Widows' Peak, even if she could play a part like this
in her sleep by now.  Her matter-of- fact confidence that her every
whim should be gospel is delightful to watch, as are the subtle ways in
which she demonstrates her condescension.  Natasha Richardson goes
appropriately over-the-top as the sexy and (perhaps) sinister Mrs.
Broome, looking precisely like the personification of a red dress at a
funeral.  Adrian Dunbar is also exceptional as Godfrey, who puts on a
great show of wanting to break free of his mother's overbearing will,
but proves too willing to play the doting son.
     Of course, there is also Mia Farrow.  In her first post-Woody
outing, Farrow reminds us that she can indeed play something besides a
female version of Woody Allen's neurotic persona.  Her role here is a
tricky one to pull off, balancing several layers of suspicion and
deception, but she does pull it off, and with surprising grace.  She
gets some positively venomous lines, and seems to delight in delivering
them.  Irvin has clearly made her role the showcase, and in one last
lingering shot, seems to be saying, "I knew you could do it."
     The mystery elements which drive the second half of the film are
perhaps a bit too easy to figure out, as Irvin and screenwriter Hugh
Leonard underline each of their clues with too much emphasis.  But if
they are not tremendously surprising, it doesn't seem as though they
were really intended to be.  This is not a film predicated on some
gasp-inducing, CRYING GAME-like twist; rather, the plot twists are just
there to allow the character development, befuddling at first, to fall
into place.  In fact, the only time WIDOWS' PEAK really slows down is
when there is lengthy exposition, particularly at a dinner party which
is unfortunately handled in a slightly clumsy manner.  But with or
without the mystery, WIDOWS' PEAK would still have been funny and
frisky, filled with nicely detailed cultural moments but mostly just a
crisp and fun-filled hour and forty minutes.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     WIDOW'S PEAK is a shoddy comedy cum drama about a glamorous
English war widow (Richardson) who wreaks havoc in the humble hamlet of
Kilshannon, a small Irish resort town in the mid 1920's.  Her home is
on a hill--a minor mount called Widows' Peak, where all the residents
are childless and manless.  This maiden mafia is ruled by the blustery
Mrs.  Counihan (Plowright), whose son (Dunbar) is also the pride of the
Peak.  When the war widow sets her sights on the son, she also draws
the attention of the Peaks' strangest spinster, Miss O'Hare (Farrow).
Needless to say, the two commence a-feudin'.
     WIDOW'S PEAK is shoddy.  The dialogue is muted, the direction is
limp, and the music is way too-intrusive. (For a contrast, look at the
clean direction and smooth execution of SPEED.  Different subjects;
same medium.)  The story--written over ten years ago with Mia's mom in
mind--also has problems, notably in the late-in-the-film leap from
comedy to drama.
     The actors are fun, though, and help balance the boredom.
Richardson is great and even manages an accurate American accent.
Plowright is a gas, casually tossing off line after haughty line.
"Enough's enough, we don't want to spoil them!" she tells her fellow
widows, who are tending their husband's graves.  Farrow is fine, but
her character is underwritten.  A loss.  The two prominent
males--Adrian Dunbar and Jim Broadbent--are both good.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The screenplay of WIDOWS' PEAK was written years ago for Maureen
O'Sullivan to play O'Hara and for Mia Farrow to play Broome.  Time
passed and Farrow took the role originally written for her mother.  It
is really a pity it was not cast that way since O'Hara had the fiery
personality of O'Hara.  One side effect is that Farrow has to sound
Irish and Richardson has to sound American.  It would not have been
nearly as difficult for Farrow to sound American and her mother to
sound Irish.  Also, Farrow is far too quiet and introspective for the
role.  Richardson has a teaspoonful more personality, but neither
actress can wrest the audience's attention from Plowright.  Adrian
Dunbar of HEAR MY SONG is present but a real disappointment in a role
that gives him little chance to fulfill the promise he showed in that
film.
     One odd note, the film steals a joke from CASABLANCA.  In a film set
after 1943, it would have been considered a film allusion.  WIDOWS' PEAK is
set in the 1920s and that makes        it a theft.
     SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...

Author
Oscar van Vliet
     I saw this film a week ago in a sneak preview in Utrecht's Camera
theater.  It stars Mia Farrow, and some other people I had never heard
of.  The film is located in the Irish village of Kilshannon.  The
village is more or less divided into two parts: The lower part, where
the common people live, and the hill, called Widows' Peak, where the
film is set, and where the widow's of Kilshannon live.  This has been
arranged long ago, to keep men off the hill, and only widows can buy a
house on the hill.
     The film handles the arrival of a new resident, a young British
widow whose husband died in the war (it is set shortly after WW1 if I
recall).  For some reason one of the Ladies has a violent dislike for
her, which evolves throughout the movie into a war without quarter and
eventually leads to the downfall of the village.
     Though you won't notice it in the beginning, the film is done so
that you can guess the outcome a quarter of an hour away.  Also, the
fights between the two ladies are by far not subtle enough.  I suppose
the writer wrote how two men would handle it, and "femalized" the
fight, but it just doesn't work.  The acting could be better, and the
pace is too slow to keep your attention focused, but at least the
setting is done right.
     All in all, I gave it 4 out of 10, and a definite warning not to
see it if you're not into this kind of movie.  As I left the cinema,
the comments I heard around me would indicate that they'd better not
show this one at all.

Author
James Berardinelli
     While it may not be as enchanting as ENCHANTED APRIL (although it 
features two of that film's stars), as appealing as HEAR MY SONG, or as 
funny as FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, John Irvin's delightfully charming 
WIDOWS' PEAK can hold its own against those and many more.  This is a 
very British comedy that will cause laughter and smiles wherever it is 
shown. 
     Overlooking the Irish village of Kilshannon is Widows' Peak - a 
group of select houses owned and inhabited exclusively by the rich women  
of the community who have buried at least one husband.  The matriarch of 
Widows' Peak is Mrs. Doyle-Counihan (Joan Plowright), who lives with her 
son Godfrey (Adrian Dunbar).  Also inhabiting the peak is Mrs. O'Hare 
(Mia Farrow), a woman who has never been married and who hasn't a penny 
to her name.  Then there's the newcomer:  a beautiful, young war-widow 
(it's 1920) named Edwina Broome (Natasha Richardson), who brings with 
her more secrets than those already buried in and out of the graveyard. 
     Secrets are indeed at the center of WIDOWS' PEAK, and much of the 
comedy in this lighthearted romp comes through their revelation.  Though 
the film is a trifle overplotted, it's still enjoyable to uncover the next 
sordid detail of someone's past before the characters on screen do so. 
     With a similar infectious charm to any of the previously-mentioned 
movies, WIDOWS' PEAK draws its audience in with promises of little more 
than a enjoyable time - a goal at which it succeeds.  There are no deep 
or hidden meanings to be found, no matter how much the plot itself relies 
on secrets. 
     Joan Plowright has settled nicely into playing the stuffy matron, 
and she is again successful in that role.  Although the actress is more 
than capable of doing a dramatic turn when a part requires it, there's not 
much seriousness demanded from Mrs. Doyle-Counihan, and Mrs. Plowright 
pilfers countless scenes from her co-stars by sheer screen presence. 
     Mia Farrow turns in a better performance than she has given in a 
number of years.  Having freed herself from Woody Allen's angst-riddled 
characters, she is allowed an opportunity to shine in a role that one 
might not typically associate with her.  Meanwhile, Natasha Richardson 
(THE HANDMAID'S TALE) plays her part with a delicious "falseness" which 
betrays that something's up - although we don't know exactly what.  Her 
American accent is flawless, which is something of a pleasant surprise. 
     Jim Broadbent (LIFE IS SWEET, ENCHANTED APRIL) and Adrian Dunbar 
(HEAR MY SONG) do solid jobs as supporting characters, but it's the 
women to whom every scene - and the movie as a whole - belongs.  After 
all, it's not called WIDOWS' PEAK for nothing. 
     Although there may be one twist or turn too many, and the plot 
skeleton is not without its supporting contrivances, few viewers will 
complain.  WIDOWS' PEAK, while admittedly not a great movie, offers a 
good time - and often that's all that is wanted from any motion picture. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
