Title
Review for Big Bus, The (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     Larry Cohen took a break from his offbeat horror tales to co-write
this James Frawley directed vehicle (pun intended), a parody of the
disaster movies boom that surfaced in the mid-seventies.  The big bus
itself is the pride of the Coyote (not Greyhound) fleet, a
nuclear-powered luxury transit vehicle that is about to make its
inaugural run non-stop from New York to Denver.  Add to this the
following  plot ingredients:  a driver haunted by an incident from his
past, a collection of eccentric passengers, a disaster which sends the
vehicle out of control ... it's easy to see the similarity between THE
BIG BUS and the 1980 disaster spoof AIRPLANE! (actually, there's only
two minutes difference in their running times).  While I find both
films funny, the disconnected, rapid-fire gags of AIRPLANE! have been
recycled too often by the slew of similar 'zany' takeoffs that it
spawned to make it any longer unique--which leaves THE BIG BUS the
more distinctive of the two, by default.
     Joseph Bologna, Stockard Channing, and John Beck, as the principal
crew of the bus, have to play their roles fairly straight, leaving most
of the laughs to their oddball passengers, ably represented by--among
others--Richard Mulligan, Ruth Gordon, and Rene Auberjonois (he's a
cynical priest who beats the elderly Gordon to a window seat and smirks
"Where is your God now, old woman?").  Nobody has a particularly big
role--except for the bus, which really is big - but the 'star-studded'
cast of familiar faces is one of the conventions of disaster movies
that writers Cohen and Fred Freeman have stuck to.  They have also
incorporated into the plot elements of other notable disaster
flicks--specifically AIRPORT, AIRPORT '75, THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE (!),
and even a touch of EARTHQUAKE--though what's more interesting is their
choice of subject.  The film-makers obviously noticed the trend in
these movies to place frightened-but-resourceful passengers together on
any number of calamity -bound vehicles.  Along with the planes and
ships of the previously mentioned titles, these hapless casts have had
their lives endangered by  trains, airships, and even rollercoasters.
A big bus was all that was left.  This is, of course, absurd.  The
film's level of humor reminds me of a MAD magazine movie send-up
(Illustrator Jack Davis was even called in to design the movie poster)
and from what I've seen, its amiable, silly approach will be enjoyed by
early teens more than adults.  At least the producers didn't feel they
had to resort to cheap innuendo and "comic" violence.
