Title
Review for Blood Run (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
It doesn't look good when the film has the best scenes in
the beginning. In the case of BLOOD RUN, 1994 erotic
thriller by Boaz Davidson, the scene in the beginning is not
only the best but also the only one worth watching, at least
if male audience is concerned. The scenes of torrid sex
between two young, rich and beautiful women don't last long,
because one of the participants gets murdered. The
investigation is given to Brad Kingsbury (played by David
Bradley), violent, boozing police detective who also happens
to be bad father. He quickly finds the suspect in Tanya
Borgman (played by Anna Thomson), surviving member of the
lesbian couple. However, beautiful and sexy Borgman soon
shows that her sexual orientation isn't very strict, so
Kingsbury succumbs to her seductive abilities, endangering
his career and life in the process.
What distinguishes BLOOD RUN from myriad of other erotic
thrillers is the fact that it looks like one of the most
shameless rip-offs of BASIC INSTINCT. Director Davidson and
scriptwriter Dennis Dimster tries to counter such impression
with few shootout scenes more suitable for Hong Kong action
films. However, such efforts are in vain, because plot and
characters simply look too similar to those in Verhoeven's
film. This is especially the case with Anna Thomson, who
spares no effort in order to look identical to Catherine
Trammel from BASIC INSTINCT, including the similar outfit,
but nevertheless she fails in such task because of her too
obvious cleavage. While (male) fans of Anna Thomson would
probably enjoy this film, the rest of the audience should
avoid this cheap knock-off and enjoy the original instead.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
