Title
Review for Tapeheads (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        This definitely is not SPINAL TAP!  I am referring to the movie
TAPEHEADS, which tries to do for music videos what THIS IS SPINAL TAP did
for heavy metal: that is, provide a biting satire of the industry.  The
movie stars John Cusack and Tim Robbins as two good-for-nothing security
guards, who after losing their jobs, head for L.A. to try their hand at
making rock videos.  They call themselves the "Video Aces" and turn a
run-down loft in a seedy area of town into a production studio.  TAPEHEADS
traces Robbins and Cusack's improbable rise to fame.
        Despite its promising premise, TAPEHEADS falls far short of
reaching the brilliant level of parody that Rob Reiner achieved in SPINAL
TAP.  Bill Fishman, who directed TAPEHEADS, is a respected rock video
director best known for his work with the Ramones, Suicidal Tendencies, and
George Clinton.  However, TAPEHEADS is Fishman's first feature film, and
the movie reflects his lack of experience.  Under Fishman's direction,
TAPEHEADS often loses focus and coherence just when the satire is building
momentum.  Several other faults mar the movie as well, including a weak
script and poor acting.
        Cusack, who was exceptional as Buck Weaver in EIGHT MEN OUT, is
untypically mediocre and extremely disappointing in TAPEHEADS.  His
performance as an aggressive scam artist feels forced; Cusack's likeable
demeanor is not well suited to his unsympathetic role.  As Cusack's meek
video-whiz sidekick, Robbins (BULL DURHAM) is adequate.  His character is
more interesting and likeable than Cusack's, but Cusack overshadows him in
the film.  And to top things off, I was constantly distracted by Robbins'
uncanny resemblance to David Letterman; throughout TAPEHEADS, I constantly
expected to see some stupid pet tricks or a cameo by Paul Schaffer.
        The movie is also plagued by a stupid and unnecessary subplot about
a presidential candidate, a videocassette of him engaging in kinky sex, and
blackmail.  TAPEHEADS is desperately in need of more focus, stronger
protagonists, and above all a director, like Rob Reiner, behind the camera
who can maintain a subtle yet pointed satirical tone.
        Despite its numerous shortcomings, TAPEHEADS is not without its
merits.  The movie has an off-beat, quirky sense of humor and contains
several inventive scenes that succeed in humorously satirizing the music
video industry.  For example, the Video Aces film a hysterically funny
commercial in which the owner of a chicken and waffle fast food restaurant
struts around in gold chains and does a Run DMC-style rap.  He pays the
Aces for their services in buckets ... of chicken, that is.
        TAPEHEADS does a good job of mocking everything from rock videos to
TV newscasts to commercials for presidential candidates; unfortunately,
these biting parodies of television are few and far between.  The movie is
full of great cameos including Weird Al Yankovic, Ted Nugent, Bobcat
Goldthwait, Mike Nesmith, Martha Quinn, and Lyle Alzado.  The eccentric
soundtrack is also a lot of fun; it features actual bands like Devo and
Fishbone and fictitious ones like the Blender Children and a '60s soul duo
called the Swanky Modes.  However, in the balance--despite these few bright
spots--TAPEHEADS has just too many shortcomings for me to recommend it; see
SPINAL TAP again instead.
