Title
Review for Twice Upon a Time (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Inventive animated tale produced by George Lucas and directed by John
Korty and Charles Swenson.  The minds of sleeping Rushers (humans) are
being influenced by the dream-dispensing land of Frivoli and the
nightmare-inducing Murkworks.  The key to their power struggle is the
mainspring from the Cosmic clock, which controls all time.  Fast,
witty story isn't for all children, especially those who won't have
patience for its unique look and flippant, incidental storyline. 
Visually, film is a combination of rainbow-hued watercolors, pen and
ink, live action, and still photographs.  Its endearingly scrappy look
is matched by its throwaway dialogue - I can imagine this being the
kind of cartoon Robert Altman might produce. 
Hip characters provide many laughs, especially overenthusiastic
superhero Rod Rescueman (James Crenna), and a nonchalant fairy
godmother (Judith Kahan Kampmann).  There's also the nominal lead
character Ralph, a thing that looks like an extra from YELLOW
SUBMARINE (voice actor Lorenzo Music).  Film's main basis for
characterization is to play against stereotype - an idea we're overly
familiar with now, but don't mind in this case because the whole
production has such an easygoing feel about it.  The animators slip in
many visual gags, mostly to do with film and television - one of the
characters is an aspiring actress, another an aspiring writer, another
an aspiring heroic lead.  Consequently, story treats the manufacture
of dreams and nightmares as being akin to the movie-making industry. 
Most interesting visual effects occur when we see a nightmare
activated in the world of the Rushers. 
