Title
Review for Enemies: A Love Story (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Holocaust is over and Herman Broder survived.  Now he is haunted
only by nightmares of the night the Nazis took his wife, Tamara, and
children.  All three had been killed in the death camps, he'd been told.
Now Broder is married to Yadwiga, the Polish servant whose family saved his
life.  Off and on he teaches Yadwiga to be Jewish, though she seems more
earnest about it than he is.  He has an okay job as a ghost writer for a
famous rabbi and he has a good-looking mistress on the side.  That's Masha,
a fiery Jewish woman who also survived the death camps.  For now Broder is
getting by, but soon his mistress will be pregnant and wanting to be
married, and to make matters worse, Broder's first wife survived after all
and this will leave Broder with two wives more than he can handle.
     Paul Mazursky's ENEMIES, A LOVE STORY, based on a story by Isaac
Bashevis Singer, is a surprisingly well-realized comedy-drama with four
characters, one husband and his three wives, all believable and three-
dimensional.  And the fifth character is the post-war Jewish community in
New York, very authentically recreated on the screen--authentic enough that
it brought back memories of when I was very young, not long after this film
is set.
     Broder's three wives are very different types, each with her own
strengths.  Margaret Sophie Stein plays stolid, sincere, and homely Yadwiga,
still half living in the Poland in which she grew up.  She knows her husband
has some hanky-panky going on, but ignores it while she can, thinking that
if she can make herself Jewish enough she can hold on to him.  The
bewitching Lena Olin (of THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING) plays Masha,
burning out her life as quickly as she can.  Then there is Anjelica Huston
as Tamara, at first bitterly bent on reclaiming her husband but eventually
transforming herself into a healing force.  And at the center of these women
is Herman himself (played by Ron Silver), confused and indecisive, with a
need to feel he is in control of things, most of which are beyond him.
     There is a lot of film here.  For a film with both comedy and drama,
there is surprisingly much of each.  The comedy does not feel at all forced
and is all very human.  The drama is also very human and at times very
painful.  Maurice Jarre understood the film very well and provided a score
with light klezmer music to underscore the comedy and with sad clarinet
music to underscore the more serious moments.  ENEMIES is one of the better
films of 1989, a year that had more than its share of good films.  I rate it
a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  For those who worry about such things,
there is explicit sex and indistinct dialogue.  I didn't mind the former,
but lamented the latter.
