Title
Review for Mister Johnson (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
It took director Bruce Beresford 25 years to get this project off the
ground.  Intelligent, sensitively-handled drama (based on Joyce
Carey's novel) is set in West Africa during the days of Britain's
empire-building.  It features a standout performance by Maynard
Eziashi in the title role as an Nigerian clerk working for the British
government in the village of Fada.  Johnson's eagerness to be accepted
as an English gentleman by his country's new landlords is a phenomenon
observable in several colonized provinces throughout history.  It's
also the kind of compromise that can only lead to misunderstanding
from both cultures.  The irrepressible, entrepreneurial Johnson is a
dreamer, who thinks big enough not only to see himself as a rich,
respectable businessman, but also to embrace the ambition of his
district officer (Pierce Brosnan) to build a 100-mile road.  The
completion of the road, which will make the Empire's Â‘civilizing'
processes even easier, tells us that the end of the village's (and
Africa's) innocence is nigh.  It's the kind of imperialism that we
instinctively blame for Johnson's downfall - but looking back we can
see that the real villain of the film is commerce.  Every scrape that
Johnson gets into is less a result of cultural clash than simple
mismanagement of money, and it's not only the British that he gets
into trouble with.  The opportunistic, ingenuous Johnson is just the
type we would expect to fall foul of the law, whether native or
British, as a matter of course.
Beresford seems to be drawn to assignments set in desolate landscapes,
and here he convincingly transports us to the 1923 colonies.  As would
be expected, he gets solid performances from Eziashi, Brosnan (whose
repressed character demands he be underplayed), and Edward Woodward as
a local store owner (more memorable here than in Beresford's BREAKER
MORANT).  There are several scenes you'll react to on an emotional
level - the quietly triumphant completion of the road and the
unforgettable final scene are the two most notable examples.  The
dusky photography by Peter James suits the film perfectly.  Definitely
worth your time - critics applauded it even though it sank without a
trace at the box office.   If it wasn't for the success of his
previous film, DRIVING MISS DAISY, Beresford may never have been able
to convince backers to produce a film featuring an unknown black actor
in the lead role.  Incidentally, this must be the only film I've seen
set in an African village that doesn't wind up with someone's house
burning down.
