Title
Review for Miracle, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rod Williams
     I don't believe I've ever posted a movie review here before, but
just this once I feel I must.  Because I want people to know about a
wonderful, low-budget, limited-distribution (by Miramax, bless 'em!),
new film from Ireland, THE MIRACLE, directed by Neil Jordan (THE
COMPANY OF WOLVES, MONA LISA).
     Jimmy and Rose are best friends.  They're in their late teens, and
live in Bray, a tired old seaside resort town not far from Dublin.  It's
summer, they're bored and they hate "this dump," so they entertain
themselves by strolling around town inventing lives and histories for
the people they encounter on the way.  The little old lady staring out
to sea doesn't move when an old gentleman with a cane walks by, but
Jimmy and Rose know that "her heart leaps when he passes her."  A group
of nuns laughing and splashing in the waves seem so young and childlike
"because they're married to a man they've never seen."  The bland-
looking businessman in a cafe -- "the drabness of his life was so
complete as to have its own fascination."  Rose writes this down for
future reference.  You'd think that Bray and the people in it existed
only for Jimmy's and Rose's amusement and scrutiny.
     Jimmy lives with his father, Sam (Donal McCann) a heavy drinker
who repairs musical instruments by day, and leads a dance-band by night,
at a local hotel ballroom.  Sam plays the saxophone, as does Jimmy, but
it's clear that the son has much more talent than the father.  Jimmy's
mother apparently died when he was still a baby.  Sam wonders why Jimmy
seems to hate him after all he's done for him.  It hasn't been easy
raising a child alone.
     Then two things happen to change everything:  a mysterious and
beautiful woman "from abroad" (Beverly D'Angelo) steps off the train
from Dublin.  And the circus comes to town....
     That's as much as I'm going to tell.  The plot is paper-thin, and
it's given away to the audience almost immediately.  The joy of this gem
of a movie is in the acting, and the telling of the story, and its
delicious mixture of the commonplace and the magical.  Yes, it does at
times teeter dangerously on the brink of "mellerdrama" or cliche, but
it's always saved in the nick of time by the wonderful actors, or a
breathtaking directorial turn.
     This is one of those movies that sends you floating out of the
theatre on a cloud, and makes you smile uncontrollably for days.  Go see
it!

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Because there is no way I can see to give a summary of the film
without giving away a little of the film, the summary of the film is
right after the spoiler warning.
     THE MIRACLE is a very good film, and I highly recommend going to
see it in the theater or renting it, depending on what is available in
your neighborhood.  It doesn't make a difference in which way you see
the film.  THE MIRACLE has been released on video cassette and is also
still playing in some third run theaters.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give THE MIRACLE a four.   THE MIRACLE is rated PG for adult situations
and explicit language.
     *Contains minor spoilers for THE MIRACLE*
     Teenager McCann sees D'Angelo one day on a beach in his home town.
He falls in love with her, so he tries to get her to go out with him.
She is hesitant because she is his mother, which McCann doesn't know.
D'Angelo can't tell McCann that she is his mother, but doesn't want him
to hate her.
     THE MIRACLE is not trying to be a real somber drama, as the title
might suggest to you.  When I went to see this film, I was really
worried that it was going to be some boring overdramatic film.  It was
part of a double feature and I wanted to see the other film so I figured
that I might as well see both.  I was surprised at how good this film
was.
     The actors and actresses in the film do a great job.  The only
person in the cast that I had previously heard of is Beverly D'Angelo
(who plays Clark's wife in the NATIONAL LAMPOON'S VACATION series).  The
director, Neil Jordan (MONA LISA, WE'RE NO ANGELS), did a great job.  I
have only seen one of his films, HIGH SPIRITS, in the past, which was
not as good as this one.   The script is well written and keeps up
interest through the film, although there are a few slow spots.
