Title
Review for Motorama (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:29, R, Comedy, 1992
Director: Barry Shils
Cast: Jordan Christopher Michael, Susan Tyrrell, Jack Nance, John Diehl,
      Garrett Morris, Michael J. Pollard, Flea, Drew Barrymore, Meat Loaf,
      Dick Miller, Irwin Keyes
     Ten-year-old Jordan Christopher Michael steals a car and goes off
on a trip through a strange country collecting Motorama cards trying to
win the Motorama game.  Along his trip, Michael meets some very
eccentric people.
     MOTORAMA was just released on videocassette and because of its
great cast I wanted to see it.  Now I want to warn all of you about
it.  Don't see this film, it is slow-moving, boring, and not very
funny.  On a scale of zero to five, I give MOTORAMA a one.  MOTORAMA is
rated R for female nudity, explicit language, and adult situations.
     Most of the cast of this film are normally funny, but in this film
they either aren't given enough time to do anything or have badly
written characters.  Jordan Christopher Michael doesn't show any talent
in this film, but he's still better than that horribly annoying
Macaulay Culkin.  Susan Tyrrell (CRY-BABY, FAR FROM HOME) is completely
wasted.  She is barely on screen long enough for one to recognize her.
Jack Nance (WHORE, MEATBALLS 4) just starts to get going and then isn't
on screen any longer.  John Diehl is on the screen longer than anyone
in the cast except for Jordan Christopher Michael, and he is only on
for about five minutes.  He doesn't do that good a job, but it may just
be that his part was poorly written.  Garrett Morris (CAR WASH,
CRITICAL CONDITION) isn't given time to do anything.  Michael J.
Pollard (TANGO & CASH, FAST FOOD) also isn't given enough time to be
funny, or even establish a character for that matter.  Flea (BACK TO
THE FUTURE - PART 3, DUDES) may just be the best thing about this
film.  Drew Barrymore (DOPPELGANGER:  THE EVIL WITHIN, SKETCH ARTIST)
is completely wasted and shown as just another pretty face.  Meat
Loaf's (THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW, THE SQUEEZE) character was very
poorly written.  Dick Miller (MATINEE, GREMLINS) isn't allowed to do
anything.  Irwin Keyes (MOB BOSS) more than being wasted is given a
character that many may find to be offensive because it makes fun of
mentally retarded people in a poor way.
     If you hadn't gathered by now, this film is very poorly written.
Jokes are poorly executed, if they even are executed.  In one scene,
Jordan Christopher Michael loses a Motorama card that he needs out the
window next to a reservoir.  Instead of falling down into the
reservoir, it sails around in the air for a few seconds and then falls
in Michael's hand.  I fail to even see the purpose for this scene to be
added.  That's not the only scene like it either.  Many scenes are
started, but never end up being finished.  Like at one point a dead man
is dragged down to a river.  Michael washes his face in the river then
leaves.  The dead man is never spotted, explained, or has anything else
done with.  I sat through it, sometimes in extreme agony, and when it
finally came to the end, I felt incredibly cheated.  The ending is
horribly done and I think all viewers will be disappointed with it.
Even the endings to most of the low budget slasher films are better
than this ending.

Author
Gerald Edgar
     MOTORAMA is a 1991 comedy written by Joseph Minion and directed by
Barry Shils.  It is such a charming little movie, I wonder why I had
never heard of it before.
     The star is Jordan Christopher Michael as Gus, a ten-year-old on
the road.  (His previous credits are two made-for-TV movies.)  We see
Gus's (dare I say it?) quirky adventures as he travels.  But where is
it?  It seems (at first) to be the western rural USA (it was filmed in
California and Arizona); but after a while we see from the details that
it is not.  Maybe it is some future time, or some alternate USA, or
perhaps just some generic place dreamed up for the movie.  It might be
interesting to take the states Gus visits, and see if they can be
identified as corresponding to real places.
     Many of the small roles, people Gus meets along the way, are
played by well-known actors, including: Drew Barrymore, Dick Miller,
Vince Edwards (as a doctor of course), Michael J. Pollard, Jack Nance,
Charles Tyner, and Robert Picardo.  But don't get the movie to see
these actors, because each of them is only briefly on screen.  Writer
Joseph Minion's previous film AFTER HOURS is also quirky in its own
way, but I liked MOROTRAMA much more.
     Unexpected things happen to Gus along the way.  The ending is a
bit peculiar, and it left me smiling, wanting to see more.  If you like
strange movies, try this one.  MOTORAMA is rated R, presumably for
language: the sex and violence could be easily PG-13.
