Title
Review for Ruby in Paradise (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The 1993 film RUBY IN PARADISE by Victor Nunez, the writer and
director of the current and highly acclaimed ULEE'S GOLD, is a coming
of age story with a difference.
     Young Ruby Lee Gissing, played by Ashley Judd in what should have
been an Oscar nominated performance, has left her Tennessee home to
make a new life for herself in Florida.  Although she is about 20 years
old and in her sexual prime, the coming of age surrounds her business
life, specifically getting and keeping a job, not her sexual one.  She
does have a couple of romantic flings, but the focus of her story, as
told in a marvelous and insightful narration by Judd, is independence
via work.
     In a further twist, the profession she seeks is not something
considered glamorous by society.  She does not try to save any rain
forests or strive to be a brain surgeon.  No, her place is in retail.
She is perfectly willing to take any job, including back breaking
commercial laundry work, but what she enjoys most is her unglamorous
position at Chambers Beach Emporium, where she sells trinkets and beach
towels.  She even travels to trade shows with the owner, Mildred
Chambers (Dorothy Lyman), to further her career in sales.
     As the story opens, Ruby arrives in Panama City, Florida, looking
for work.  Since it is the off season, people are cutting back, not
hiring.  After initially being rejected by Mrs. Chambers, Ruby pleads,
"I've done retail before, and I work real cheap."
     Ruby is a quiet but resolute girl who shares her thoughts mainly
with her diary, which serves as text for the narration.  She is also
beautiful, which compels Mrs. Chambers to tell Ruby a single rule:
dating her son Ricky, played by Robert Mitchum's grandson Bentley
Mitchum, is strictly forbidden.
     Although handsome Ricky, with his drawer full of wrapped CD
players for his dates, looks like trouble, Ruby says yes to him almost
immediately.  He proves to be one of many learning experiences for her.
     Mitchum gives a good reading of the local rich kid who uses
people.  One minute he puts Ruby's dreams down.  ("The selling game
can't mean anything.")  And the next he threatens her with being fired.
("You know most people are only two paychecks away from the streets.
Did you know that?")  To reinforce the fragility of her position,
Nunez's plot includes Ruby's brief encounter with a homeless family
living out of their car and on their way to some, hopefully, better
place.
     Judd's performance is the centerpiece of the film.  Her sincere
and calm approach to the character makes Ruby compelling without ever
being showy or boastful.  Ruby may not be sure where she is going, but
she has confidence in her ability to survive and prosper.  Judd's eyes
are sometimes fixed and piercing and at others, rapidly scanning
characters to size them up.
     Friends are important to Ruby for companionship but never as a
crutch.  Rochelle Bridges (Allison Dean) is her buddy who gives her
advice, not that she needs it all that much.  Eventually, Ruby meets a
male friend who respects and loves her.  Mike McCaslin (Todd Field)
works at the local plant nursery, but his passions are books and
causes.  Ruby comes to share his love of novels and poetry but leaves
the causes to him.  In another twist, their romance is as sporadic as
it is successful, from Ruby's perspective.  Ruby, you see, is busy
preparing for the summer selling season.
     In a show where the main criticism is that, as in life, it
sometimes drags, tragedy does eventually occur.  Most scripts would
have the character go through a metamorphosis when under such stress,
but not Nunez's.  Ruby uses her same convictions to get her through it
and treats it as just another one of the speed bumps of life.
     The naturally poetic script has Ruby confessing toward the end
that, "I heard that Hell is when all your dreams come true."  Ruby will
not have to worry about her final destination.  She always has a
another dream, albeit usually a modest one.
     RUBY IN PARADISE runs 1:54.  It is rated R for sex and brief
nudity.  The show would be fine for teenagers and they would benefit
from seeing a upbeat show with such a positive and subtlety delivered
message.  I recommend the movie to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Ashley Judd, Todd Field, Bentley Mitchum, Dorothy Lyman.
Screenwriter/Director:  Victor Nunez.
     Truth be told, I should disqualify myself from reviewing RUBY IN
PARADISE.  You see, I have a certain bias:  I've fallen helplessly,
hopelessly, desperately in love with Ashley Judd.  As Ruby Lee Gissing,
the central character in writer/director Victor Nunez's low-key
character study, Judd delivers a phenomenally appealing performance,
capturing a young woman's struggle to make her life better with
frankness and intelligence.
     As RUBY IN PARADISE opens, Ruby is on the road, fleeing her
Tennessee home for something, anything, better.  She finds herself in
Panama City, Florida, a summer resort town now nearly shut down with
the coming of fall.  Still, Ruby manages to find a job at a local
souvenir store run by pragmatic Mildred Chambers (Dorothy Lyman).
From there, Ruby begins to explore her new world, including a brief
fling with Mrs. Chambers' playboy son Ricky (Bentley Mitchum).  Soon
she begins a more meaningful relationship with Mike (Todd Field), an
intelligent but cynical biker who works in a plant nursery.  As Ruby
begins to settle into a routine much like the one from which she ran,
she begins to examine why it was she moved, what she is looking for,
and how, in the words of best friend Rochelle (Allison Dean), "to
survive with your soul intact."
     RUBY IN PARADISE is not an easy film to get wrapped up in.  It
moves very slowly, and virtually nothing substantive happens from a
plotting standpoint.  RUBY is an internal story in an external medium,
and will not be for everyone.  But that internal story is one rarely
examined, the story of a young woman on a journey of self-discovery,
and Victor Nunez handles it with gentle insight.  While Ruby is not an
eloquent or well-educated woman, there is nothing simple about her.
She is filled with complex and conflicting emotions and attitudes--a
basic morality colliding with her rejection of her religious
upbringing, a hope that life can be better coupled with a certain
cynicism.  The voice-over narration of Ruby's diary entries provide
sharp snapshots of her inner life.  So much is conveyed in Ruby's
description of her first night with Mike:  "And yes, we got it on, all
tender and romantic."  Ruby Lee Gissing is one of the best written
female characters to grace the screen this year.
     Oh yes, and there's this Ashley Judd person.  Her portrayal of
Ruby is nothing short of stunning, a heartbreaking yet ultimately
affirming take on one woman's strength of spirit.  As RUBY IN PARADISE
opens, Judd adopts the look of a newborn, an openness to the new
opportunities available to her combined with the fear of being thrust
into an unfamiliar world.  It is this look that makes a winner of
Ruby's first encounter with Ricky, looking at him curiously through
shelves and over the counter at the souvenir store despite Rochelle's
warnings about him; it is this look that lends poignancy to a scene in
which Ruby takes a deep smell of her quilt as she goes to sleep,
remembering a more familiar place.  Later, as Ruby's new life becomes
more of a struggle, Judd keeps carrying herself straighter and
straighter in defiance.  At her center is a fierce determination, her
refusal to surrender in the face of challenge etched into every
movement.  Her pride in her own resourcefulness is captured in a
comment to Rochelle:  "I managed to get out without getting pregnant or
beat up; that's something."  This is a beautiful job by a natural young
actress who commands the camera's attention.
     If RUBY IN PARADISE fails to be fully satisfying, it's because
Nunez doesn't surround Ruby with characters one-tenth as interesting as
she is.  Ricky is so slimy and transparent that he inspired hoots from
most of the audience, and Bentley Mitchum is not subtle enough an actor
to underplay the easiest mannerisms to overplay.  Todd Field handles
Mike a bit better, but Mike also is too much of a "type" instead of a
person.  "Mama's Family" and "All My Children" veteran Dorothy Lyman
could have been much more interesting as Ruby's surrogate mother, but
she's too cold in her early scenes and maintains a certain aloofness
throughout.  I was much more interested in tangential characters like
the simple young girl who lives next door to Ruby.  It's too bad Nunez
couldn't have invested as much in the featured players.
     RUBY IN PARADISE does drift somewhat, and its two hour running
time is a bit much.  Still, it's amazing what one great character and
one great performance can do for a slow-moving story, and Ashley Judd's
Ruby is worth the price of admission all by herself.

Author
James Berardinelli
     When Ruby Lee Gissing (Ashley Judd, the daughter of country singer
Naomi Judd, and younger sister to Wynonna) makes it out of her
Tennessee home town "without getting pregnant or beat up," she
considers it quite a feat.  With all her belongings in her car, she
arrives in Panama City, Florida with hardly a dime to her name and
little more than childhood memories to go on.  Nevertheless, her pluck
and determination land her a job in the off-season because Mildred
Chambers (Dorothy Lyman), the owner of a souvenir shop, sees something
in her.  Ms. Chambers has only one rule for her employees:  the don't
date her son Ricky (Bentley Mitchum).  So when Ruby not only goes out
with him, but ends up in his bed, her troubles are about to begin.
     Male coming-of-age stories are a dime-a-dozen, but the same cannot
be said for the female equivalent, especially when the story is told
with intelligence and sensitivity.  This makes RUBY IN PARADISE a rare
and welcome change of pace.  Oddly enough, for something with this much
insight, it's a surprise to note that it was written and directed by a
man, Victor Nunez.
     The film gives Ruby two men to choose from:  the scheming,
cheating Ricky,who offers her sex, gifts, and a good time; and the
deep-thinking Mike (Todd Field), who offers her companionship and
security.  Ruby, however, is less concerned about finding herself a man
than finding out who she really is.  She came to Panama City to get
something that she couldn't get back home.
     By Nunez' own admission, most movies present women as either
objects to be "bought or [those that] get to be worshipped as perfect
things that a man must work to become worthy of."  Such typical
Hollywood treatment was not for the director of 1979's GAL YOUNG 'UN
and 1985's adaptation of John D. MacDonald's A FLASH OF GREEN.  He
wanted Ruby to be something different and more substantial in a movie
about "soul work."
     Nothing of a monumental nature happens in RUBY IN PARADISE, but
the depth of the character study, coupled with Nunez's talent for
recognizing small details, makes for a surprisingly compelling motion
picture.  This story is so real that it's like watching the life of
someone you lost touch with after high school.
     Ashley Judd's performance is worth more words than I have space
for.  Her grasp of Ruby is such that every nuance of the character is
brought out, and the subtlety with which certain emotions are brought
to the fore demands appreciation from a viewer.  (It caught Oliver
Stone's attention; he cast her in NATURAL BORN KILLERS after seeing
this and being "bulldozed" by her at an audition.)  Ms. Judd repeatedly
outacts and outshines her co-stars.  There isn't a moment in this movie
when Judd's Ruby is upstaged, and she's in every scene.
     Interestingly enough, having also seen THE PIANO, I've been
privileged to see two strong female leads in one day, which is
something of a rarity.  While Holly Hunter will likely receive an
Academy Award nomination for her performance, the same will not be true
for Ashley Judd.  It's a shame, but that's the way Hollywood works.
     Ruby Lee Gissing is so much like the heroines of the Jane Austin
books she reads that even she recognizes the similarities.  The
toughness, intelligence, and resiliency are all there, and with the
deft hand of Nunez replacing that of Austin, this makes RUBY IN
PARADISE a surprisingly fresh and engrossing little film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
