Title
Review for Caligula (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Dequina
Since its initial release in 1979, no film quite like _Caligula_ has
ever been made--and with good reason; it is widely known to be one of the
worst films ever made, and anyone who's seen it would be hard-pressed to
argue with that assessment.  But as with a lot of bad would-be art, this
cinematic oddity holds a truly bizarre fascination, especially in this
fully restored, 20th anniversary edition, which is slowly making its way
around to big screens around the country.
On the big screen is the only way one can, ahem, "appreciate" this
gaudy, flat-out bizarre exercise in cinematic fragmentation.  Whatever
chance this film had of turning out well was done in by the participants'
conflicting intentions, which can be broken down into three perspectives.
 From one, there are original screenwriter (the adapter remains
uncredited) Gore Vidal and the Serious British Actors (including no less
than Sir John Gielgud and Peter O'Toole), who obviously believed they
were making a serious expos√© of the decadence of the Roman empire, namely
the reign of the megalomaniacal title character (Malcolm McDowell).  Then
there's original director Tinto Brass, whose insistence on filling every
last shot of film with some artfully-lit nudity comes straight from the
school of mainstream exploitation cinema.  Last--and certainly not
least--comes (in _every_ sense of the word) producer and _Penthouse_
publisher Bob Guccione, who wrested control of the film from Brass and
then shot and edited in some balls-out (literally) hardcore pornography.
The finished product, as one can glean, is one giant mess.  Any given
scene can shift from McDowell's overacting to nonchalant glimpses of full
frontal men and women to explicit closeups of sexual penetration.  It
makes for a jarring watch--but certainly never a boring one.  In fact,
it's this identity crisis that lends the film its biggest virtue:
unintentional comedy.  As disgusting as it is for most audience, how can
one _not_ laugh at the film's centerpiece cum shot, which has to be the
first and only in screen history that has been scored to a full-blown
orchestral crescendo and climax?
These "additional scenes directed and photographed" by Guccione and
Giancarlo Lui come out of nowhere and have only tangential connection to
the story--no surprise since the main actors were called on to do just
that, and only anonymous extras get down and dirty.  For example, the
film's famous girl-on-girl scene is sloppily intercut with a rather tame
threesome between Caligula, his wife Caesonia (Helen Mirren, whose role
consists of standing around in various states of undress, spouting very
little dialogue), and beloved sister Drusilla (Teresa Ann Savoy).  The
tiny plot "thread" that connects them is that the two women ("played" by
_Penthouse_ pets Anneka DiLorenzo and Lori Wagner) spy on the three from
a secret room, get hot, and get it on; eventually, their activities win
more screen time than those of the three bonafide characters.  I must
admit that the lesbian encounter is the only hardcore interlude that can
be considered remotely erotic, but that doesn't make its inclusion any
more ludicrous, especially in light of the fact that the secret room,
which is shown in an earlier scene as being dark and empty, features a
big, fully made bed and is lit with a seductive red light.
But it's not as if there's a whole lot of plot to begin with, anyway. 
The apparent point of the film is to show that Caligula was--to put it
bluntly--one sick motherfucker.  He was hungry for power; he indulged in
sexual excess; he exacted violent action upon his enemies.  It's a point
that comes clear within a half hour at most.  But _Caligula_ drives home
that point over and over again until, after two-and-a-half-hours,
Caligula's reign meets a suitably bloody end.  Before that point,
however, we see Caligula's sadism in graphic detail; in one especially
notorious scene, Caligula's guards cut off a man's penis--in tight
closeup--then feed it to dogs.  We also see everything--and I mean
everything--that goes down (literally) at the many orgies Caligula
stages.  And then there's Caligula himself.  To McDowell's credit, he
threw all inhibitions out the window and spared no risk in taking this
role.  But then there's the matter of the risks he's made to take: he
prances around in a skimpy toga; he wildly dances in the rain completely
nude; he vomits in slow-motion; he rapes the bride at a wedding
reception, then fists the groom; he licks a dead female body up and down;
he even gets to sleep with a horse.  That McDowell performs these tasks
with such deranged gusto actually helps--what would otherwise be
stomach-turning and offensive is rendered ridiculously laughable.
Which is what _Caligula_ is behind all the violence, sex, and various
bodily fluids: an idea so preposterously bad as to be hilarious
(big-budget pornographic historical epic?).  The rerelease poster boasts,
"Just as shocking twenty years later."  Indeed it is, but not in the way
intended.  Moreso than, say, the sight of a group of guys ejaculating
into a bowl (yes, that's in there), what is truly shocking is that
_Caligula_ ever got made.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Tinto Brass (with "additional scenes" by Bob Guccione and
Giancarlo Lui)
Writers: (well, no real writer, persay, but it's "adapted from an
original screenplay by Gore Vidal," and features "additonal dialogue" by
Bob Guccione and Giancarlo Lui)
Starring: Malcolm McDowell, Teresa Ann Savoy, Helen Mirren, John
Steiner, Guido Mannari, Giancarlo Badesi, Bruno Brive, Lori Wagner,
Anneka DiLorenzo, Donata Placido, Peter O'Toole, John Gielgud
My friend here in film school just made a two minute-long film for one
of his classes that includes a staged anal rape scene, done by two guys
and shot on the shadow of the incident, with a banana being used as the
instrument of penetration.  As sick as this all is, watching it is one
of the most admittingly hysterical moments I've ever witnessed.  Sure,
it may be in bad taste, but what the hell is bad taste other than
something that may be offensive to some but is riotously amusing to the
rest?
Then there's "Caligula."  This film features incest, necrophilia,
beastuality, anal rape, homosexual felatio of both sexes, elaborate and
lengthy orgies, a greased-up fist forced up a man's rear, wine poured
down a man who's had his urinary tracts tied off, a penis chopped off
and fed to hungry dogs, etc, etc, etc.  This could very well be a
respectable film, and if could have been had the following not occurred:
a) the events were graphically shot in clear view; b) the tone was not
that of trying to shock comically but to, well, show "historical
accuracy;" c) the film was a 20 million dollar production with lavish
sets, a rather impressive cast, and a whopping 2 1/2 hour running time.
Produced and funded by none other than Bob Guccione, owner of Penthouse
Magazine, "Caligula" comes across as the most hysterical dramatic
picture since "Plan 9 From Outer Space" because underneath there's a
sense that everything this film is doing is not only accurate and
justified, but also brilliantly entertaining.  After all, it's not
really the fact that this film features the aforementioned disgusting
moments, but that it actually believes in them as dramatic weaponry.  No
film should be discarded because its content, because film is never
about what it's about, it's about how it's about (as the old cliche
goes).  Those who bash this film for content are glancing over the
biggest and most obvious problem with "Caligula," and that's that it's
nothing but overdramaticized bullshit from start to finish, without a
second of credibility in its mammoth running time.
"Caligula" allegedly tells the true story of the evil Roman Emporer of
the same name, a man who was so insanely decadent that his assasination
came as a blessing...or so I guess, even though almost every single
Roman Emporer was assasinated as well and for much the same reasons.
The film opens on the wrong note, of course, with a quote from Mark
appearing before any image graces the screen, using the over-used
passage "What shall it profit a man if he should gain the whole world an
dlose his own soul," depite the fact that the opening scene of the film
is of the emporer before he was an emporer, fucking around with his own
sister in a field (I suppose if one has to lose their soul, one has to
have a soul in the first place).
The plot is so incomprehensibly done that all I or anyone else can make
out of it is that Caligula (disastrously played by the great Malcom
McDowell, a performance that does the opposite that his performance in
"A Clockwork Orange" did) is next in line for the throne but can't wait
for the current Emporer, Tiberius (Peter O' Toole - ditto, only for his
performance in "Lawrence of Arabia"), his grandfather, to die...so he
kills him and ascends to the throne.  Then he abuses his position,
marries a woman (Helen Mirren, who retains her dignity as an actor by
not exactly acting) so he doesn't just have to sleep with his sister (a
dreadful Teresa Ann Savoy, there to be pretty, naked, and willing to hop
in the sack with Mac or anyone he asks her to hop in with), abuses his
position a little more, a little more, and a little more, and then, I
believe, invades England, then is killed off.
The filler, instead of recounting his life, is supposed to be, as
Guccione claims, the ultimate portrait of decadent Pagan Rome, complete
with orgies, vicious deaths, and lots of nudity.  But instead of being
the historical accurate film it really really wants to be, it instead
becomes Guccione's twisted masturbatory image of what it could be like.
Oh, isn't it great that they just loved having sex?  And that they
killed people so disgustingly?  And wouldn't it be great if I could make
a couple bucks by selling this shit off as accuracy even though it's so
blatantly real bad porn that I've completely convinced myself that it's
not.  I mean, why not just show a Roman orgy when I can spend a good ten
minutes examining every single facet that makes it up.
And it's not just that it's disgusting or vile or whatever adjective you
want to use to describe this film - it's that in a film where the entire
feel it's going for isn't felt, it's also the sloppiest expensive movie
of all time.  The sets are lavish, but so blatantly innacurate that I
wonder if no historian wanting to have his name on this film explains
this.  But that doesn't matter since the cinematography is so dark that
you wonder if a light meter was used at all, making this not only dark
and ugly, but just plain dark.  The camera operation is also the worst
I've ever seen in my entire life.  Not only does this film hold the
record for the most unnecessary zooms in one single shot ever, but often
the camera will lose its subjects and pan around till they find them,
then have them out of focus.  The editing is so sloppy that some scenes
are absolutely impossible to follow.  There is no writer to speak of
(what the hell does it mean that it's "adapted from an original
screenplay by Gore Vidal?"), but nevertheless, the dialogue is shit, so
laughably bad that I can't in good faith believe that anyone with an IQ
over 5 could say them with a straight face (my favorite being the line
when Caligula inquires the doctor about the health of the dying
Tiberius: "He could go at any moment, but with care, he could last a
year or so.")  The music in this film is mostly Prokofiev and
Khachaturian (they use his gorgeous "Adagio of Spartacus and Phrygia,"
ad nauseum), used in an attempt to give the film some emotion, but
instead feels as if it was shipped in from elsewhere.  The orgy scenes
(and one infamous lesbo scene between Penthouse Pets Lori Wagner and
Aneeka DiLorenzo) are the result of reshoots by Guccione himself, which
are so obviously removed from everything else in this film that it only
adds to the embrassment (every five seconds or so, the film cuts to
random nudity, as if it was afraid its audience would forget this film
is rated "X").  John Gielgud represents the only voice of sanity,
walking around in his brief role as if he was constantly the mantra,
"I'm going to kill my agent, I'm going to kill my agent..."
And so on and so on, for over 2 1/2 hours, making "Caligula" about as
exciting and enriching as a three hour college lecture class and twice
as deliriously annoying.  Guccione, in his pursuit of historical
accuracy has instead made a film that is such a painstaking, arduous
task to watch in its entirety that I doubt anyone can sit through an
hour of it without irreversible psychological damage.  Throughout the
entire film, the presence of Guccione is easily felt, as if he were
standing there at the edge of the screen, pretentiously looking down
upon us saying "Look what I can get away with!  And if you don't like
this, then you're a prig, and worse than that, you know nothing about
history!"  Uh huh.
There's a clear difference between historical accuracy and doing
something that's artistically good.  A film which showed Roman decadence
as something that was perhaps liberating for some but could not last -
that would probably make for a good film.  But using historical accuracy
as a licence to get away with any kind of
disgusting-for-disgustingness'-sake acts is total, total bullshit, and
all I can say is that Guccione and the makers of this film have lost any
kind of touch with either entertainment or eroticism, and have developed
a pathetic and sadistic taste for both, judging from this film.
There's a film that came out in 1989 called "The Cook, the Thief, His
Wife, and Her Lover," a magnifcent film by legendary cult director Peter
Greenaway (also starring Helen Mirren), which deals with graphic sex,
heartstopping violence and gore, and even a little cannibalism for good
measure.  That film not only never patronized its viewers, but also
handled them in a way that was shocking, yes, but also, in a bizarre
way, entertaining and totally involving.  There were real characters
there in a real situation, and best of all passion and just the right
amount of restraint as not to get off on the fact that it's going to be
offensive to many.  That film achieved everything it wanted to do, and
has since retained a status as one of those cult films that is not only
popular but actualy good.  And it's everything "Caligula" might have
been but, alas, wasn't.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
