Title
Review for "Girl Thing, A" (2001) (mini)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
            Aptly named because of its appeal to a female audience,
this star-studded, four-hour mini-series revolves around the troubled
patients of a savvy, perceptive Manhattan psychiatrist (Stockard
Channing).  In the first story, an confused, uptight attorney (Elle
Macpherson) with a fear of intimacy is unexpectedly attracted to a
bisexual advertising executive (Kate Capshaw). Written and directed by
Lee Rose, it's sensitive, spirited and spunky - as are the subsequent
stories. But this is the most intriguing with its insightful dialogue
and daring, nude seduction scenes.  The second segment centers on
three estranged sisters (Rebecca DeMornay, Alison Janney, Glenne
Headley) with unresolved issues who are forced by their dead mother
(Elizabeth Franz) to confront the real meaning of family. In the third
tale, a wife (Lynn Whitfield) suspects her husband (Scott Bakula) is
cheating, so she hires a "top-of-the-line decoy" (Linda Hamilton) as
bait but, instead, discovers he's having an affair with a waitress
(Mia Farrow). A bottle of tequila later, the three furious women plot
their revenge. In the final episode, an unstable, seriously disturbed
woman (Camryn Manheim) threatens the doctor and a fashion model (Peta
Wilson). All four stories deal with challenges of love, trust,
vulnerability, betrayal and our fragility as human beings trying to
establish and maintain relationships despite our own insecurities. In
a memorable supporting role, the caustic owner of a coffee shop (Margo
Martindale) provides another link as another "ambassador of lost
souls." On the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "A Girl Thing" is an
engaging 8, airing in two parts - Sat., Jan. 20, and Sat., Jan. 27 -
at 8 PM on SHOWTIME TV with additional playdates Jan. 29 and 30th, at
8 PM.  If this were a continuing series, like "Sex and the City," I'd
watch every week.
