Title
Review for Thalassa, Thalassa (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Children's film from Romania like no other - if it is a children's
film.  It's a little hard to tell, although I can imagine the concept
of the story would be quite appealing to young viewers.  Simple plot
depicts the journey of seven Romanian children from their arid village
to the coast 40 kilometers away (I won't spoil things by saying how). 
This is almost a Romanian STAND BY ME - as with all road movies, the
journey is more significant than the destination - but it's light
years away from anything Hollywood would come up with.
The portrayal of children in cinema has been a long-running bone of
contention for me - they're always precocious, articulate, or cute. 
In short, they're always acting.  And it's pretty hard for children to
act like children when their lines are written by adults.  THALASSA
brings to the screen the most natural representation of children I can
remember seeing - everything they say or do is so real it'll make you
wonder if you were really like that at their age.  You were.  And
their world of logic is so abstruse it ultimately pervades the
structure of the story.  It's almost as if writer-director Bogdan
Dumitrescu has let his child actors choose the direction and events of
his film - it certainly has an improvisational feel to it.  But these
kids aren't the typically cute ensemble we've seen in countless other
films.  Their natures are capricious and arbitrary.  They switch
allegiances to each other and think primarily of themselves, and they
take absolutely nothing seriously.  As story progresses, film takes on
surreal overtones - the landscape is blasted and desolate; the
children dress in oversized clothes looted from a suitcase; and in
separate instances, a couple of the characters simply drop out of the
story - their disappearances are never explained, although we may be
right to suspect violence. 
It's worth bearing in mind that 100,000 orphans were still being
relocated around Romania at the time this film was conceived -
Dumitrescu may be taking a shot at the bureaucratical procrastination
which left a few thousand children contracting the AIDS virus in
substandard institutions.  His cast is as carefree and scruffy as any
group of street kids we would care to imagine.  Film doesn't really
have any feel-good moments until the ambiguous ending, which makes us
realize that no matter how much some children go through, the only
thing they really live for is the moment.  Does this trivialize the
rest of the film?  Who cares.  By the time they're openly celebrating
you'll be just as unconcerned about consequence as they are.  Worth
showing in a classroom, if only for the lively discussion which is
sure to follow. 
