Title
Review for Jungle Fever (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James J. DiBenedetto
     If you don't want to know anything at all about Spike Lee's new
film, you can bail out now....
     First off, I don't know what to think about JUNGLE FEVER.  It was
well done in all aspects of filming, something we've come to expect from
Spike Lee.  The acting was uniformly good, or better in some cases.  The
story was pretty tight, and there really weren't *any* wasted scenes (in
almost every  movie, there are what I call "wasted scenes," scenes that
do nothing for the plot or the characters...).
     But it seemed too, I don't know, derivative of Lee's earlier films.
This film looked a *lot* like MO' BETTER BLUES, at least to me.  The
music was in a lot of places very much like that earlier film.  And the
racist morons that inhabit both Bensonhurst and Harlem, well, we've seen
them before, too, in DO THE RIGHT THING.  
     It seems that in both JUNGLE FEVER and MO' BETTER BLUES, one of the
major themes is a male "hero" who can't make the big choices in his
life.  Flipper (the male lead in JUNGLE FEVER, played by Wesley Snipes)
doesn't decide to start a relationship with his white secretary, Angie
Tucci.  It just happens, and as he says later, he was just curious about
what it would be like with a white girl.  He doesn't decide to quit his
job; it's forced on him when he is denied a deserved promotion.  Nothing
he does is his choice, and when the film ends, he really doesn't have
anything.  Angie gained independence from her family and at least a
glimpse of life  outside Bensonhurst.  Her ex-boyfriend also got
independence.  But Flipper got nothing.
     So, I don't know what Spike Lee was trying to say with this movie.
I enjoyed it, but there were some problems.  Ther whole subplot with
Flipper's brother, a crack addict, was unrelated to the main plot, and
seemed to take over the movie at the end.  And Lee was especially
unsubtle in places.  Mainly, this was in the scenes where Flipper and
Angie are eating together after work, and then when they have sex for
the first time.  The "romantic,with a dark undertone" music comes
blaring on, which was unnecessary, because the pictures told us all we
needed to know....
