Title
Review for Monolith (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Long time ago, the author of this review watched the
documentary series COSMOS. In one of the episodes, its
narrator, Carl Sagan, made an interesting experiment. He
collected samples of all the chemical elements that create
human body and mixed them all, trying to create a man. Of
course, it failed. Unfortunately, the authors of MONOLITH
didn't watch this particular episode, otherwise they
wouldn't make a movie so utterly disappointing like this
one. Like Sagan, they had interesting elements for
interesting SF action thriller- good, or at least, capable
actors; good special effects; few interesting action scenes
- but they failed to connect them into coherent film.
The plot, like so many of them, takes place in Los Angeles.
Tucker (played by Bill Paxton) and Terri Flynn (played by
Lindsay Frost) are pair of tough LAPD detectives that are
investigating the murder of a small boy. The killer is
emotionally disturbed scientist, but, before they can find
out any motives for the killing, the suspect and all the
evidence is taken over by Department of Historical Research,
led by menacing Villano (played by John Hurt). Of course,
Tucker and Flynn decide to investigate further, and they
find a lot of violent incidents in the city - incidents
involving some malevolent alien force, capable of taking
over human bodies. But, before they anything about it, they
must take care of Villano and his henchmen, who would stop
at nothing to suppress the truth.
The concept of this film, although it resembles X-FILES
(that had the first season in the same year), is actually
very unoriginal - some mean alien coming to Los Angeles and
being unstoppable, until few dedicates members of LAPD take
care of him (like in I COME IN PEACE or HIDDEN). The
screenplay by Steven Lister is awful - it simply doesn't
connect the dots between obligatory action scenes, the
characters are unappealing and wooden, and the plot contains
wholes with the size of Nebraska. Of course, there are some
huge implausibilities (like organisation called Department
of Historical Research taking over murder suspects from
LAPD) that look like an insult to viewer's intelligence. If
Lister and director Eyres made those mistakes deliberately,
trying to turn this film into self-parody, they failed. The
film looks dead serious. Some actors, like Louis Gossett Jr.
and John Hurt, are doing their work very well, but they
can't breathe life into bad and stereotypical roles. Paxton
and Frost are, on the other hand, totally deprived of any
chemistry between the characters they play, either romantic
or classic "buddy buddy" model. Some action scenes look
interesting, but a lot of pyrotechnics and special effects
won't change the verdict on this film - MONOLITH is failed
film that should be avoided.
Review written on September 11th 1999
