Title
Review for Highway 61 (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Joseph Brenner
     HIGHWAY 61 is an attempt at being charming in a cult film sort of
way that never really comes off.  The story is very similar to, say,
SOMETHING WILD, and easily a dozen other films: a geeky but nice guy
meets a wild woman hot babe who gets him involved with some weird
happenings, and eventually they fall in love.  I'd rate it around -1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
     In this case, our hero the geek is a barber in Canada who has
pretensions of being a trumpet player (he's awful).  He discovers a body
lying in his back yard.  Our hero the wild woman (well, really the woman
in this kind of story is more of an archetypal image than a hero), is a
heavy metal roadie who decides to claim the body, so she can use it to
smuggle some stolen cocaine into the US.  She manages to con our hero
into giving her a lift, so they strap the coffin on top of his Ford
Galaxie, and off they go down Route 61.  
     First demerit: none of this makes any sense.  More importantly, the
nonsense isn't particularly engaging in any way, it's just there.
     The third character is the most interesting one, a guy who thinks
he's Satan, who goes around talking people into selling him their souls.
The joke is that they almost always do it for something really trivial,
because they don't take him seriously.  As you might expect, there's
some ambiguity about whether or not he's really Satan, but mostly he
just seems to be a nut.  He wants the body our heroes are schlepping
around.
     There are also some dissolute ex-rock stars that are friends of the
wild woman, who engage in some degenerate activity that might be mildly
amusing.  
     The "surprising" conclusion to this movie makes even less sense
than the beginning, and it's even more unsatisfying.  It's supposed to
be ironic and show some sort of change of character on the part of the
female character, but it comes out of nowhere, and it doesn't really
mean anything.
     So, there's an occasional funny line in this movie, and some minor
sound and fury near the end that might draw you in, but it all seems too
silly to matter, and it just doesn't go anywhere.
     Incidentally, there is a little Bob Dylan on the sound track, but
it's not the title cut, and it's probably just as well.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
        Pokey Jones (played by Dan McKellar) is the town barber of Pickerel
   Falls, Ontario.  Of course the name Pickerel Falls makes this place sound
   more scenic and exciting than it really is.  Pokey dreams of getting out of
   Pickerel Falls by playing trumpet and as a trumpet player he makes a pretty
   good barber.  Then Pokey's dog, Iggy Pup, finds a frozen body in the bathtub
   in Pokey's backyard.  Pokey is unable to revive the corpse with a hair
   dryer, but becomes famous in Pickerel Falls anyway.  His fame attracts two
   strangers to him.  One is Mr. Skin, who has come to collect the corpse's
   soul.  Uh, Mr. Skin collects souls.  (Skin: "I'll give you $20 for your
   soul."  [long pause]  Wino: "What's the catch?")  Only slightly less strange
   is a roadie who claims the corpse as her brother and wants Pokey to
   transport it and her to New Orleans ... after hiding a rubber tube full of
   drugs down the corpse's esophagus.
        Writer/actor Dan McKellar and director Bruce McDonald are equal
   opportunity filmmakers, laughing at people on both sides of the United
   States-Canadian border, but at the same time making some very pithy
   observations about American popular culture.  A short visit with two music
   video rock stars in a garish fancy mansion may say as much in a few minutes
   as THIS IS SPINAL TAP did in a whole film.  Then there is the father raising
   three talentless daughters to be the next Andrews Sisters.
        The NEW YORK TIMES reports that ROADKILL, a previous collaboration
   between McDonald and McKellar, won best film at the 1989 Toronto Film
   festival and hopefully HIGHWAY 61 will bring more attention to their films.
   They have a fresh eye for examining their world and the ability to
   repeatedly catch their viewer off-guard and off-balance.  This is a small
   independent Canadian film so it will not likely play at the big United
   States multiplexes.  Let's hope it gets distributed on video.  I rate
   HIGHWAY 61 a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
George V. Reilly
     HIGHWAY 61 is a film directed by Bruce McDonald from a story by Don
McKellar.  It stars Don McKellar, Valerie Bulhagiar, Earl Pastko, and
Peter Breck.  Canadian.  Rated R: restricted due to language and nudity.
     HIGHWAY 61 is, as the title suggests, a road movie, the tale of a
young couple driving from a small town in Ontario down the length of
Highway 61 to New Orleans, 1500 miles to the south.   With a coffin on
the roof.
     Pokey Jones, played by McKellar, is the town barber, one of the few
young men left in a small, dying town.  Orphaned at the age of nine, he
has grown up alone, with his father's 1963 Ford Galaxie as a surrogate
parent of sorts.  Pokey is a naif and a would-be musician who wants to
go to the America of his dreams and become a famous trumpeter.
     The catalyst comes when he finds a frozen corpse in his backyard.
The local newspaper, desperate for news, proclaims him a hero for trying
to revive the corpse and catches the attention of a fugitive roadie.  A
quick-witted opportunist, Jackie Bangs (played by Bulhagiar) claims the
corpse as her brother and seizes a few minutes alone in the funeral
parlor to stuff the corpse full of drugs.
     By force of will, she convinces Pokey to drive her and her
brother's corpse to New Orleans for the funeral.  With the coffin
strapped to the roof, they head south, talking their way past the US
Customs, but not without some difficulty.
     Although they don't realize it at first, they are being pursued by
Mr. Skin (Pastko), who also claims to be Satan.  Satan has a contract
signed in blood by Jackie's "brother" in which he was sold the young
man's soul upon his death.  Satan wants to collect and follows them,
buying up a few more souls along the way.  Most of them come cheap: a
bottle of bourbon, $20, or a promise of fame and beauty.  He's also
uncannily lucky at bingo.
     Pokey's initial high spirits are reinforced by the pilgrimages he
makes along the way---Bob Dylan's childhood home, St. Louis,
Memphis---but are then dampened as he comes to realize Jackie's true
character.  He is especially shocked when Jackie steals the lifesavings
of the Watsons, three untalented little girls and their showbiz father
who travel around the country, "bringing pop to the people."
     The film is quirky and often funny, treating its characters in a
good-natured fashion.  Both McKellar and Bulhagiar give strong
performances, as do Pastko and Breck (as Watson).  The main problem is
that the film is too long to sustain itself and begins to plod: the
scene with the drugged-out rock stars for whom Jackie was once a roadie
could have been cut with little loss.
     If you like offbeat films, you'll probably like HIGHWAY 61.
     (Of note: I have been told that the jingoistic US Customs guard is
played by Jello Biafra of the Dead Kennedys, who is apparently known in
real life for his anti-American views.)

