Title
Review for Deux anglaises et le continent, Les (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Har-even
     LES DEUX ANGLAISES ET LES CONTINENT also known as TWO ENGLISH
GIRLS is one of the most beautiful films of the director Francois
Truffaut.  The script is based on a novel by Henri-Pierre Roche, who
also wrote JULES ET JIM.  The film was released in France on 1971 and
was a big failure.
     The film is the story of the love between a young Frenchman called
Claud (Jean-Pierre Leaud) and two English sisters, Anne (Kika Markham)
and Muriel (Stacy Tendeter).  The story takes place in England and
France before WWI.  The characters of Claud, Anne and Muriel are
presented by Claud and by the "author."
     The complicated love story is surrounded by two different
atmospheres.  On one hand, there is puritan and peaceful England in the
end of the Victorian decade.  On the other hand, there is imaginative
French with its freedom and impressionism on the horizon of a new
decade.  The two opposite environments are portrayed with soft colors,
authentic lighting and realistic decor by the "mise en scene" of
Truffaut and the camera of Nestor Almandros.  The result is a magical
restoration of that period.  It is easy to notice throughout the film
paintings of Cezane and Renoir transformed into their cinematographic
equivalence.
     The main theme, however, is about love.  Many films about love were
made, but only few of them handle this subject well.  We may recall LES
ENFANTS DU PARADIS (tragic love), L'ATALANTE (sensual love), LOVE ME
TONIGHT (romantic love), CITY LIGHT (pure love), LETTER FROM AN UNKNOWN
WOMAN (absolute love), THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO (impossible love) and
other films.
     Early in the film, Claud said that true love must be physical.
Truffaut also told that he wanted to create a film about physical love
but he did more.  The feelings between Claud and Anne and Muriel and
Claud reflect tragic, sensual, romantic, pure, absolute, impossible,
physical and other forms of love.  The plot consists of a climax
followed by another climax and so on.  As the events become more tense,
the true love between Claud and one of the sisters grows.  After the
last climax, Truffaut could have ended the film but Truffaut was
honest.
     The last scene is truly impressionistic.  It gives the film its
final perspective.  In the end, we are sad for all the pain, we are
excited by the beautiful story but the most outstanding thing, in my
opinion, is the sensitivity and sincerity which dominate the whole
film, the sensitivity and sincerity of a great director.
