Title
Review for Gojira VS Mosura (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jim Mann
Warning: This review contains a few spoilers. (As if that really
matters in movies involving giant monsters battling to the death.)
     I recently watched GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1992) and GODZILLA VS.
MECHA-GODZILLA (1993), the 4th and 5th films in the revisionist
Godzilla series.  Like the previous film in the series, GODZILLA VS.
KING GHIDORAH, they are good films (if you take them for what they
are), a return to a quality in Godzilla films that, prior to KING
GHIDORAH, we hadn't seen since the mid-1960s.
     One note, though, before I begin my reviews.  The GODZILLA VS.
MOTHRA tape I watched was entirely in Japanese (which I don't speak).
Therefore, I really watched it as a visual/musical experience.  I could
make out most of the plot, but I'm sure there are things I've missed.
GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA was subtitled.
     GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA is sort of a remake of parts of the original
Mothra and of GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1964; a.k.a.  GODZILLA VS. THE
THING).  Mothra's egg hatches, Mothra comes to Japan, creates a cocoon,
turns into a giant moth, etc.  At the same time, Mothra and another
moth-like giant creature, Batra, battle Godzilla.
     The effects are impressive, by and large.  Toho studios have
gotten very good at making the destruction of miniature buildings look
real.  American movie makers could learn something here (and perhaps
save themselves hundreds of millions of dollars).  The monster fights
are very good and some are rather innovative, especially the undersea
fight between Godzilla and the Batra.
     Another nice point is the soundtrack.  It is again by Ikira
Ikafube and is again very good.  It contains echoes of some previous
soundtracks, but with some completely new themes. (Though, as noted
below, the GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA soundtrack does this one
better.)
     It's not as good as the original GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA which still
remains the second best movie in the whole series.  I'd rank it,
though, high in the second level--behind GODZILLA, GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA
and GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA (1993), and about on the par with
GODZILLA VS. KING GHIDORAH and GHIDRA, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER.
     GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA is a step up.  This is surprising.
First of all, it is following a couple of pretty good movies, so it is
a pleasant surprise to find one that's even better.  Secondly, though,
this time they didn't remake one of the better Godzilla.  Instead, they
remade (at least in the sense of borrowing title and main protagonist
from) a so-so (to be kind) movie and turned it into a very good.  It's
probably the third best movie in the series.
     As the movie begins, the Japanese government has raised the body
of Mecha King Ghidorah from the ocean floor.  Using the 23rd century
technology, they create the ultimate anti-Godzilla weapon,
Mecha-Godzilla.  Meanwhile, a prehistoric egg is discovered on an
island.  When scientists show up to investigate the find, they first
find the egg defended by Rodan (his first appearance in the revisionist
series).  Moreover, Godzilla also shows up.  They make off with the egg
while Godzilla battles Rodan.
     They assume that the egg is a Rodan egg.  However, when it
hatches, out pops a baby (8-foot) Godzilla (or gojirosaurus).  This
raises some intriguing questions.  Was the Godzilla egg put in the
Rodan nest much as a cuckoo puts its eggs in other bird's nests.  Or
are Rodan and Godzilla somehow related? There is certainly some
connection between the two, as we find in the movie's climax, when the
energy of a dying Rodan regenerates a dead Godzilla.
     The battles between Godzilla and Mecha-Godzilla are impressive.
They fight twice, and each time the battle is pretty evenly matched.
The effects are good here, as are the effects of various buildings
being destroyed.
     Ikira Ikafube's soundtrack is once again very good.  The
Mecha-Godzilla theme is perhaps the best new theme "signature" theme
for a Toho creation since the 1960s.  This new theme is mixed
effectively with many echoes of older themes, all to good effect.
     A nice point in both films as that they are internally consistent
and not particularly silly.  I cringed in GODZILLA 1985 when the used
bird calls as a Godzilla lure and when they used cadmium missles to
"moderate" Godzilla.  There's nothing like that here.  What nonsense
there is is the sort of fun nonsense that seems to fit with our
enjoyment of the movie rather than making us squirm in our seats.
     After watching GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA I anxiously await
GODZILLA VS. SPACE GODZILLA.  I also really wish someone would show
these on the big screen.

Author
David Milner
     I almost didn't make it.  The worst storm to hit the area in over
a decade had arrived the night before, there was only a fifty-fifty
chance that my flight would actually take off, and my cab was half an
hour late in picking me up to go to the airport.  Nevertheless, with
more than just a little luck, my flight to Tokyo did leave only about
forty minutes behind schedule, and I was on it.
     Flying to Japan was perhaps one of the most masochistic things
that I have ever done.  After the tenth or eleventh hour in the air, I
decided that only people who possess a certain inner peace that even
Ghandi would have envied should do this sort of thing.
     After counting the number of seats in the coach section of the
aircraft about a hundred times, I finally got to meet a Japanese
customs inspector who very politely asked if I, by any chance, happened
to be carrying any illegal drugs that he should know about.  I felt
almost sorry to disappoint him, especially after what I'd just been
through.
     Next was the shuttle bus from Narita Airport to Shinjuku Station.
This two-hour ride was the last thing on Earth I wanted to do after
having just spent close to fourteen hours doing the 'gee, I hope we
don't hit a windshear' shuffle, but, unfortunately, it was just about
the only way to get from here to there.  I could have taken the bus
directly to my hotel, but I knew that if I didn't bother to check in
first, I just might be able to catch the last showing of the evening.
     Right after the bus pulled into Shinjuku Station, I quickly
stashed my bag in a locker, and made a mad dash to the theatre in which
I knew GODZILLA VS.  MOTHRA would be playing.  When I reached the
theatre, I found that I had a whole twenty minutes to spare.
     I plunked down my Y1,800 ($15) for a ticket and headed for the
concession stand inside the theatre.  I purchased a program, two books
on the film, a can of soda, and some Godzilla gummies.
     The film started right on time, or should I say, the commercials
and previews did.  Advertisements for beer, toys, cars and upcoming
films ran for almost twenty minutes, but then, finally, the film
began.
     The prologue featured some great special effects.  The scenes
showing a meteor crashing into the ocean and a violent storm washing
away the soil covering Mothra's egg were just spectacular.  I remember
thinking at the time that Toho's special effects department had finally
shown that it could give Hollywood a run for its money.
     The prologue also included a scene with a few Americans portraying
NASA officials in it.  To my great surprise, unlike the Americans in
GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH, the previous Godzilla film, these people weren't
bad!  Yes, their appearance was brief, but they almost made me believe
that they really were who they were pretending to be.
     Next I noticed that the music ended very abruptly in one or two
spots.  I later found out that this was because some last-minute
editing had left composer Akira Ifukube virtually no time to change his
score.
     In the following few scenes, Takuya Fujita (Tetsuya Bessho), who
just happened to wear a Fedora, got caught while trying to steal a
priceless artifact from a religious shrine, and ran into a small
problem while trying to cross a wooden footbridge.  I'd heard that
there was going to be a film featuring Godzilla produced in Hollywood,
but I never imagined that he would get to meet Indiana Jones.  Seeing
this immediately convinced me that the Toho Company Ltd. definitely was
not taking GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA as seriously as it had films such as
GODZILLA 1985 or GODZILLA VS. BIOLLANTE.  It also convinced me that
screenwriter Kazuki Omori, whose much more subtle references to films
produced in Hollywood in both GODZILLA VS. BIOLLANTE and GODZILLA
VS. GHIDRAH were bad enough, should never again be allowed to work on
a Godzilla film.
     I was a little disappointed by some of the effects work seen
during this part of the film.  When the walls collapsed in on Fujita as
he tried to escape from the shrine, for example, it seemed like there
were a few people standing behind the walls simply pushing them over.
     Environmental Planning Board head Joji Minamino made his first
appearance in the film while Fujita was still in jail.  It was nice to
again see the very familiar face of Akira Takarada, who starred in
numerous genre films such as GODZILLA VS. THE SEA MONSTER, GODZILLA
VS. MONSTER ZERO, KING KONG ESCAPES, GODZILLA VS. THE THING and
GODZILLA, KING OF THE MONSTERS.
     When the cosmos (Keiko Imamura and Sayaka Osawa) appeared, I could
tell that Toho's matting techniques had really improved.  Gone were the
obvious seams that made some of the shots featuring the tiny twins in
films such as GHIDRAH, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER and GODZILLA VS. THE
SEA MONSTER so unconvincing.
     I found the idea that the cosmos belonged to a race of beings from
outer space disagreeable, to say the least, simply because it reminded
me so much of the inferior Godzilla films of the 1970s, such as
GODZILLA VS. GIGAN and GODZILLA VS. MECHAGODZILLA, featuring invading
aliens from outer space trying to take over the Earth.
     The idea that Battra appeared and attacked the civilization of the
cosmos when it became harmful to the Earth, on the other hand, I
thought was a really good one.  This, to me, seemed to be the whole
point of the film.
     I was reminded of a scene in GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH featuring
Ghidrah battling some F-15s when I saw Battra being attacked by a
number of the planes while he was swimming toward Japan.  Yes, it was
again obvious that model aircraft were being used, but these at least
were somewhat convincing, simply because they were larger, and more
detailed.  Seeing Battra doing what appeared to be his own unique
version of the breaststroke, too, was more convincing than seeing
Ghidrah flying through the air while hardly moving his wings.
     For some strange reason, Battra's cry reminded me very much of a
giant pteranodon that I remembered seeing in films such as GODZILLA
VS. MONSTER ZERO, DESTROY ALL MONSTERS and GHIDRAH, THE THREE-HEADED
MONSTER.
     At about this point in the film, there was a closeup shot of Shoji
Kobayashi, who was reprising his GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH role as Security
Chief Ruzo Dobashi, making an exaggerated face which was intended to
both express worry and be funny.  I suppose that to Japanese audiences
who had seen Kobayashi do this very same thing in both the ULTRAMAN and
KAMEN RIDER television series, this may actually have been funny.  To
me, however, it just seemed ridiculous.
     I was very pleasantly surprised when I heard Battra's theme.
Unlike much of the rest of the score, it was an entirely new piece of
music, instead of a simple rearrangement of themes first written for
films such as GODZILLA, KING OF THE MONSTERS and GODZILLA VS. THE
THING.  I also thought that the theme was good because it expressed the
character of the monster so well.
     When Battra appeared in Nagoya, and his entire body was finally
shown, I was frankly a little disappointed simply because he seemed
more like a monster that you would expect to see in an ULTRAMAN episode
than in a Godzilla film.  I was also a little disappointed by the fact
that it was so apparent in a few shots of the monster moving forward
that he was actually just a person in a suit simply walking along.
     I was not at all disappointed, however, with the optical work seen
during Battra's attack on the city.  The animation used to show the
monster emitting electrical rays from his horn and eyes was just
fantastic.
     The matte work, too, was very good.  Never before had Toho so
convincingly joined together footage of a monster with actual shots of
a city.
     Godzilla made his first appearance in the film while Mothra's egg
was being transported to Japan.  He looked pretty much the same as he
had in GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH, except he was now a little thinner, and
his eyes were yellow and red instead of brown.  The slimmer features
did make Godzilla seem a little less powerful than before, but they
also made him a bit more believable simply because his musculature no
longer seemed quite as exaggerated.
     I was surprised to hear the Godzilla roars created for films such
as KING KONG VS. GODZILLA and GODZILLA VS. THE SEA MONSTER being used
instead of the lower ones heard in the more recent Godzilla films.
This, too, showed me that Toho definitely was not taking GODZILLA
VS. MOTHRA as seriously as it had the three previous Godzilla films.
     I was also surprised to hear that a better job had not been done
with the sound mixing of Godzilla's roars.  Some of them just were too
quiet.
     When Godzilla showed a distinct interest in Mothra's egg, Fujita
attempted to separate the ship he and his companions were on from the
floating platform on which the egg was resting by releasing the tow
cables connecting the two vessels.  Mr. Ando (Takehiro Murata), the
Marutomo Corp. executive who was interested only in protecting the
investment of the company for which he worked, tried to prevent Fujita
from doing this.  The extended struggle between the two seemed
contrived to me simply because I thought Mr. Ando's devotion to his
job was a bit extreme, to say the least.
     The battle between Godzilla and Mothra, which took place
immediately afterward, also seemed contrived to me, although not as
much so.
     A new, higher-pitched sound was heard whenever Godzilla used his
breath.  This frankly was much too artificial sounding to be
believable.
     The noises made by Mothra, on the other hand, were all exactly the
same as before.
     Some of the most unconvincing special effects in the film were
shown during Godzilla's clash with Battra at the bottom of the ocean.
For example, there were what were supposed to be lots of tiny air
bubbles superimposed over the shots of the two monsters fighting, but
these did little to help create the illusion that the battle really was
taking place underwater.  Instead, they simply made it difficult to see
what the monsters were doing.  The fact that both Godzilla's breath and
Battra's rays did not seem to be at all affected by the water through
which they were supposedly traveling also made some of the underwater
footage unconvincing.
     The sound effects heard during this part of the film, on the other
hand, actually were pretty good.  The roars of both monsters, in
particular, really did sound like they were being produced underwater.
     When Fujita discreetly avoided having to face his daughter at
Narita Airport, which for some strange reason looked very familiar to
me, he finally began to develop a distinct identity, and I finally
began to feel that I was looking at a Japanese treasure hunter, instead
of an Indiana Jones clone.
     Soon afterward, Mothra was shown swimming toward Japan with the
sun in the background and sunlight being reflected on the water.  This
very atmospheric shot was just fantastic.
     Hearing the cosmos perform THE SONG OF MOTHRA, as well as a few of
the other songs from films such as MOTHRA and GODZILLA VS. THE THING,
really brought back some memories for me.  Akira Ifukube's new
arrangements were all good, and served to keep the songs from sounding
dated, but, unfortunately, the singing was a little flat in a few
spots.
     Mothra's attack on Tokyo featured some great shots of buildings
being destroyed, but was still a little unconvincing simply because
Mothra looked too much like a model, and not enough like a living
creature.  Also, it was obvious in some shots that Mothra was just
being rolled along on wheels.
     Seeing the cosmos talk to Mothra through an open window, to me,
was yet another sign that Toho was not taking GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA as
seriously as it had the last few Godzilla films.  It frankly seemed
like Mothra was being portrayed simply as the cosmos' pet.
     There were some not quite convincing, but interesting,
front-screen projection shots included in the footage of the military's
bombardment of Mothra.  Never before had Toho been quite as successful
in filming live actors performing in front of projected footage of some
miniatures.
     Up to the point in the film in which Mothra began to construct his
cocoon, Makoto Otake had been doing a fine job portraying Marutomo CEO
Takeshi Tomokane as the sort of unscrupulous businessman that you just
love to hate.  However, seeing the character get down on his hands and
knees in guilt and frustration while Mothra was constructing his cocoon
made me feel that perhaps Otake was beginning to get a little too
carried away with his role.
     The psychic Miki Saegusa, also seen in both GODZILLA VS. BIOLLANTE
and GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH, finally was given an opportunity to use her
abilities when Godzilla emerged from Mt. Fujiyama.  I frankly have
never much liked the idea of having a psychic in a Godzilla film, but I
must admit that Megumi Odaka does always give a surprisingly credible
performance.
     After Godzilla emerged from the mountain, there appeared on the
screen absolutely the best computer graphics ever seen in a genre
film.  Toho definitely should use the same type of animation again if
it decides to again show how the Japanese military tracks giant
monsters in the upcoming GODZILLA VS. MECHAGODZILLA.
     Mothra's emergence from his cocoon could have been a little more
convincing, but the singing of the cosmos heard during the scene
actually was pretty good.
     The adult Mothra looked a little stiff in some shots, but I was
really surprised by just how animated he seemed in a few others.
     Battra's transformation from larva to adult was just incredible.
The optical work seen during the sequence really showed what special
effects director Koichi Kawakita could do.
     The adult Battra was a little disappointing because he was much
too small in comparison with the larval stage of the monster, and
because he was at times just so obviously a model.
     Like the shot of Mothra swimming toward Japan, the footage showing
the military's attack on Godzilla was very atmospheric.  It frankly was
nice to see this touch added to a very familiar scene.
     The final battle between the monsters I thought was very well
choreographed.  Having Battra save Mothra's life by preventing a Ferris
wheel from falling on him, however, was just a bit too much for me to
take.  Yes, it had already been clearly established that GODZILLA
VS. MOTHRA was not meant to be taken very seriously, but this was just
too much.
     For the most part, the special effects seen during the battle were
excellent.  The matte work showing the monsters in Yokohama was
impressive, and the opticals, too, were very good, although when I saw
Mothra emitting rays from his antennae, I did begin to feel that
perhaps Koichi Kawakita had gotten a little too carried away.  About
the only shots that could have been improved upon were a few of the
ones showing Battra and Mothra flying, but even these were much better
than most of the shots in GODZILLA VS. GHIDRAH of Ghidrah flying.
     Seeing Mothra flying in outer space at the end of the film
stretched credibility, which had already taken quite a beating, a bit
beyond even the liberal limits that most genre fans would allow.
However, it did make for a nice shot, and provided for a smooth segue
into the closing credits.
     When the film ended, and I got up to leave the theatre, it
occurred to me that Takao Okawara, who directed only one other film,
REIKO, must have been given a considerable amount of autonomy simply
because GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA was so much more lighthearted than any of
the three previous Godzilla films.
     Next it occurred to me that perhaps the best acting performance in
the film had been given by Satomi Kobayashi, who played Fujita's
ex-wife Masako Tezuka.  I felt this way simply because Masako came
across as being the most credible of all of the characters in the
film.
     Finally, it occurred to me that I was feeling utterly exhausted
not only because I hadn't slept in over thirty hours, although that
probably was the main reason, but also because I'd just spent the past
one hundred and three minutes trying to keep up with what was
unquestionably the fastest paced of all of the Godzilla films.
     A few days later, I went to see GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA once again,
this time in a theatre located inside the Yurakucho Mullion building,
the circular glass building located only a few blocks away from the
Ginza which genre fans may remember as the one that Godzilla crashed
into in GODZILLA 1985.
     After noticing how much more coherent the film seemed, I vowed to
never again go see a film in a foreign language immediately after
having spent almost an entire day traveling.
     Aside from that, the only thing I noticed which I hadn't before
was that in seeing Godzilla appear not only in a film featuring a
revamped version of a famous American movie character, but also in one
with such good special effects, I was perhaps seeing a little preview
of things to come.  If so, I just hope that TriStar Pictures doesn't
make the model for the revamped character in its Godzilla film quite as
obvious.
David Milner  Columbia University
inet:   dave@blackbox.cc.columbia.edu
Usenet: ...rutgers!columbia!blackbox!dave
        ...rutgers!columbia!blackbox.cc.columbia.edu!dave
