Title
Review for Off Limits (1988/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Late 1980s witnessed huge avalanche of "high concept" cop
movies, inspired by the success of the first LETHAL WEAPON.
Of course, very few had any chance to match Donner's success
and most of them turned out to be unwatchable garbage. On
the other hand, some of those movies, although less
successful, might look interesting even today. Nice example
is SAIGON, cop movie with the most preposterous "high
concept" of the era (even more outrageous than RED HEAT with
Soviet policeman taking out criminals on American streets).
Obligatory cop combination is made of Buck McGriff (Willem
Dafoe) and Albaby Perkins (Gregory Hines) - two soldiers who
work as plain clothes military policemen in war time
Vietnam. Their thankless job is to wear plain clothes and
catch deserters, drug dealers and other misbehaving
servicemen in the streets and slimy bars of Saigon. One
night they are called to investigate the murder of the local
prostitute whose last customer had the insignia of high
ranking U.S. officer. Their investigation reveal the whole
series of similar murders, but before they can find the
identity of the killer, they realise that their own lives
are in danger.
Script by Cameron Crowe and Jack Thibeau is a textbook
example of police movie clichÂ‚s. Almost every element of is
here - two policemen who bend the rules, their investigation
is against all odds, their superiors are inimical and
drowned in red tape, the main bad guy is someone predictably
nice in the beginning of the film, and their dull police
routine is made interesting by a couple of standard
shootouts and car chases. Even the obligatory love interest
is thrown in the mix - in the form of a nun (played by
Amanda Pays with obvious lack of interest); apart from
(luckily) unresolved sexual tension with McGriff, she also
provides some cheap (and in the final result quite
repulsive) elements of comic relief (like the scene when she
wears habit and discusses the case in the middle of sleazy
strip bar).
Under all those stereotypes, SAIGON hides some interesting
themes and subplots that could have been explored by more
ambitious filmmakers. First, by presenting wartime Saigon as
modern equivalent of Sodoma and Gomorrah, place of utter
depravity, corruption and immense poverty, Crowe underlines
the fact seldom noted in Hollywood movies dealing with
Vietnam War - that the Vietnamese people are actually those
who suffered the most in that grim episode of recent U.S.
history. Another theme is more universal - the importance of
individual life and morality in war. McGriff and Perkins are
boy scouts who decide to pursue justice disgusted with the
deaths of few unimportant civilians, while in the same time
they witness the deaths of hundreds of their comrades every
week. What forces them to pursue such uncompromising and
unpopular course of action (instead of simply turning the
other way, like most of people in their situation would) is
never properly explained (although the lack of explanation
works better than implausible explanation for similar
behaviour in Litvak's NIGHT OF THE GENERALS). That escalates
into almost surrealistic notion that for the cause of
"justice" they should even co-operate with their mortal
enemies from Viet Cong. Motives of the Viet Cong in helping
them are even less explained, and that is another big flaw
of this movie. Finally, SAIGON presents another disturbing
truth - that the standards of morality in war totally differ
from those same standards in peace. This is illustrated in
the most powerful episode of the whole movie, in which U.S.
colonel Armstrong (Scott Glenn in one of the most impressive
roles of his career) reveals himself as sadistic pervert who
leads small army of bloodthirsty fanatics; but that officer
and his unit are actually praised by their superiors for
their exceptional efficiency at the battlefield. One of the
great ironies of Armstrong's situation lies in the fact that
his psychopathic tendencies are welcome in the savagery of
war, and in the same time condemned in the "civilised"
peaceful environment.
Unfortunately, Crowe didn't use the opportunity to dig into
this themes further. Instead he left them as a side element
to the formulaic police thriller, movie we should remember
by its unused potential instead of its own quality.
