Title
Review for Poison Ivy (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Sara Gilbert lives in a dysfunctional family with her rich father
Tom Skerritt and her mother Cheryl Ladd.  Ladd is dying and has given up
on life.  Tramp Drew Barrymore, Ivy, shows up in Gilbert's life and
befriends her.  Barrymore moves in with Gilbert and becomes 'one of the
family'.  Barrymore wants all that Gilbert has and tries to get it from
her.
     POISON IVY was released in the theaters back in March or May of
1992 when I was in New York, but was unable to see it at that time.
When I got back to where I live, I waited for a theater around here to
get it, but no one did.  It was just released on video cassette this
month, so I rented it as soon as possible.  I hoped that it would be a
good film, considering how long I had waited to see it, and it was.  I
highly suggest that you try and rent this film, just be sure that you
get this version and not the earlier television film POISON IVY, which
is a totally different film and is also on video cassette.  On a scale
of zero to five, I give POISON IVY a five.  POISON IVY is released in
two versions, an unrated version (which I believe is the European
version) that runs for 93 minutes and contains explicit language, adult
situations, and brief female nudity, and an R rated version that runs
for 91 minutes and, I believe, is missing the scene of brief female
nudity.
     Sara Gilbert ("Roseanne") gives a great performance as the 'victim'
of this film.  She shows that she can give a dramatic performance and
could very possibly have a chance at a good film career.  Drew Barrymore
("2000 Malibu Road," FAR FROM HOME) is obviously the highlight of this
film, and probably will be the biggest draw to audiences.  Her
performance is excellent and she is very convincing as the tramp who
shows up in Sara Gilbert's life and slowly ruins it.  Tom Skerritt seems
to just be along for a free ride in this film.  He isn't on screen for
much of the film, and when he is, his acting is good, but not excellent.
Cheryl Ladd, although she is on the screen for less time than Tom
Skerritt, gives a depressing, but exceptional performance.
     POISON IVY is an interesting movie that is well written.   The
characters are interesting and the movie flows along smoothly.  The
direction, by Katt Shea Ruben is excellent.  I think this is Katt Shea
Ruben's best film since STREETS.  Through the combined effort of
everybody involved in this film, they have taken what could have ended
up as just another B movie and made it into a great film that is
definitely worth watching.
