Title
Review for Last Voyage, The (1960)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Gripping production by veteran writer-director Andrew L. Stone.  A
luxury liner takes in water and slowly sinks during an ocean cruise. 
Disaster-movie convention would have us expect the usual mob panic,
cross-section of characters, and sweaty, tight-jawed troubleshooters. 
But Stone has seen all this before: instead, the calamity of the
shipwreck is focused into one event - a passenger (Dorothy Malone) has
her leg trapped under wreckage in her cabin.  Throughout the film we
watch, with mounting tension, as her husband (Robert Stack) tries to
save her and their child (Tammy Marihugh, well directed in her role). 
It's a nifty twist on a familiar theme that only one passenger on a
sinking ocean liner should be in any danger, but Stone wrings it for
all it is worth.  Ultimately the emotive scale of a disaster can still
be measured with just one human life.  You'll empathize with Stack as
he struggles with a cumbersome oxygen tank, knowing that he is asking
the impossible of himself to save his wife.  As her death - i.e., her
`last voyage' -  becomes imminent, the story shifts attention to the
survival of Stack and Marihugh, who are too distraught to leave her. 
At which point do the living acknowledge responsibility to continue on
for the sake of the dying?  
We don't have much time to dwell on this dilemma because Stone keeps
events moving. Story is told from two perspectives, that of the family
and those of the chief crew.  George Sanders has played enough cads in
his time to make us assume his Captain qualifies is the `villain' of
the piece.  But he really makes only one bad decision - he's willing
to enlist the advice and skills of his crew and do everything he can
to keep his passengers safe from that point on.  Stone's direction is
unhurried and functions without sensation - the flooding interiors of
the ship are entirely believable, and the sinking of the ship is done
with slow, steady, technical precision.  Note also the use of natural
sounds to heighten atmosphere - there's barely a note of music played.
 Only bad call is John Houseman's portentous voice-overs that appear
every time we see the ship in long-shot.  Presumably this was added to
remind us that the liner was indeed sinking. 
