Title
Review for Smile (1975)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
One of Michael Ritchie's better films:  a California town holds the state 
finals for the Young American Miss beauty pageant, and we are placed in the 
position of judges - not of the contestants but of the pageant itself.  
Since ridiculing beauty contests is  about as easy as shooting fish in a 
barrel, you'd be right to expect SMILE to be an all-out comedy.  It is funny 
(the kind of film that immediately attracts the phrase 'wickedly funny') but 
smart enough to keep its satire played relatively straight.  The pageant 
itself is low-key enough to be believable within the budget/facilities of 
the host town (Ritchie actually charged real audiences to watch the fake 
contest!) -  there's no need for high-stakes glitz-and-glamor  when we can 
see the same sort of facade exposed much more humbly and just as relevantly. 
  This approach also has the benefit of helping us sympathize with the 
contestants, who for the most part are a pretty down-to-earth and amiable 
group of girls.
The contestants' interviews, rehearsals and performances are the main thrust 
of SMILE's satire, but Ritchie and screenwriter Jerry Belson see a 
reflection in the small town itself.  I don't know who came up with the idea 
of casting Bruce Dern and Barbara Feldon as the pageant organizers but it 
was either a happy accident or just plain inspired.  What better role to 
exploit Dern's disarming grin and snake-oil voice than that of a car 
salesman?  And what better part for a car salesman to play than a beauty 
pageant judge - after all, the merchandise is similarly labeled, polished 
up, and displayed on stage to the accompaniment of smooth-talking patter.  
The connection between the contest and Dern himself is summed up when one of 
his friends mockingly accuses him of being just another Young American Miss. 
  I think it's more likely that Dern has become the pageant personified, a 
blatant symbol of all that is artificial.  It's impossible to tell when he's 
being sincere, even though he remains consistently loyal to the idea of the 
contest (when he utters down-home phrases like "holy heck" at points of 
exasperation, it seems to be the huckster in him still talking).   At the 
conclusion of the contest he sits alone at the judges' table, evaluating a 
lifestyle of dressing up for his lodge brothers, performing absurd rituals 
(even sillier than the pageant), selling used vehicles and judging contests 
("Gold this year!" he says approvingly when he sees his new official's 
badge).  It comes as a  nice moment when he finally drops his guard, loses 
his ever-present smile, and attempts to strike up a real conversation -  but 
then discovers that he can't be a 'real' person in his small-town world.
SMILE's matter-of-fact approach works well in its favor.  We might laugh at 
some of the cobbled-together items in the talent contest, but it's plain 
that these girls are only doing what they are best at, no matter what it 
turns out to be.  Despite the number of contestants, and their limited 
screen time, everyone seems to be a well-realized character (as opposed to 
the more satirical standards of caricature).  Familiar names in the lineup 
include Annette O'Toole, Melanie Griffith and Colleen Camp.  Charlie 
Chaplin's song 'Smile' is used effectively to open and close the film.  You 
have to wonder if Belson and Ritchie set the beauty contest in California 
just so they could get the Beach Boys' 'California Girls' on the soundtrack.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.
