Title
Review for Toto le h√©ros (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  The reminiscences of a man who blames
     all the pain of his life on a friend with whom he believes he
     was switched at birth.  Childhood and adult fantasy
     intertwine with reality as Thomas (nicknamed Toto) plots his
     revenge on Alfred.  Strange but likable film.  Rating: low +2
     (-4 to +4).  (Warning: there are spoilers in this review.)
     Thomas van Hasbroeck is unstuck in time.  Well, in fact his whole
family was a little unstrung in various ways.  Thomas grew up with the
childish fantasy that he had been switched with another baby, Alfred, in the
nursery and the rich kid across the street really belonged to Thomas's
family and Thomas belonged to the rich family.  Through life, every
misfortune Thomas suffered he blamed on Alfred.  Every piece of good fortune
Alfred enjoyed should have gone to Thomas.  Thomas blamed Alfred for the
loss of the two women he loved.  One was his sister Alice, who was
attractive and had a natural flair for arson and incest.  Later it was
Evelyne, who loved Thomas but married Alfred.  All this is a set of
disjointed reminiscences of the old Thomas as he plans his revenge on
Alfred.  At each age, we see Thomas's fantasies of revenge against the
dastardly usurper Alfred.  Usually they are framed as scenes from a spy film
about the great Toto--Toto is Thomas's nickname.  And part of what the film
is about is the function of fantasy as an important part of how we see
reality.  Thomas must know that he is making most of his fantasies up, but
they impact strongly on his world view.
     Flashing forward and backward in time, we see little enigmatic memories
as flashes that will later be fleshed out.  Eventually we discover that the
film has played a nifty little sleight-of-hand on us--a double sleight-of-
hand, in fact.
     The director and screenwriter of this Belgian-French-German production
is Jaco van Dormael, who went from being a clown to being a children's
theater director to being a film director.  He has fun with children and the
way they look at the world.
     This film has been getting a lot of positive comment after appearing at
several film festivals.  It is a little slight for the comment it is
getting, but it is worth seeing.  I give TOTO THE HERO a low +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
