Title
Review for Sleepaway Camp (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Iaderosa
    As my first review, I thought that I would do one of my favorites. 
This film is hated by many a people, but for some reason, I have a
direct fondness for it.  It was made in 1983, and because it did so
good on video, it spawned SLEEPAWAY CAMP 2:  UNHAPPY CAMPERS(1988), and
also SLEEPAWAY CAMP 3:  TEENAGE WASTELAND(1988), both filmed back to
back.  From what I have heard, a fourth one has been planned, but I
have no information about it.
    The opening scene of the film has a father, sister, and brother in
sailboat on a lake.  The sailboat flips and one of the children dies
after getting run over by a group of careless teens water skiing. 
Years later, a mom is getting her niece and son ready for camp.  They
go to camp, and the niece, who's name is Angela, gets teased endlessly
because she does not speak.  The son, who's name I forget, gets into
trouble with a 90210 type bitch.  But then the killings start!  Most of
them are normal for a horror movie, and the whole camp is in a scare
because of them.  The owner is afraid because he might have to shut
down the camp because of the killings.  
    More people get killed, including the 90210 girl, and the owner. 
The whole time, the audience is kept in suspense wondering who did the
murders.  Then we find out who did it.  I will not say who it is, you
have to find that out.  The last couple of frames in the movie are some
of the wierdest, scariest, and grossest that I have seen in recent
memory.
    My suggestion to this film is that you watch it alone first, and
then after that, show it to people.  It is pretty damn funny watching
them guess the whole time, and then their faces of disgust at the end.
So ignore the stupid cover of the video box, (because it is stupid, of
course) and get ready to watch a good cheese film.
