Title
Review for Adjuster, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE ADJUSTER is a Canadian film directed and written by Atom
Egoyan.  It stars Elias Koteas, Arsinee Khanjian, Maury Chaykin, and
Gabrielle Rose.  It is rated R for sexual situations.
     THE ADJUSTER has moved from the recent Seattle International Film
Festival to a theatrical run in this town.  By all reports it was one of
the successes of the Festival.  Atom Egoyan is the Armenian-Canadian
director of FAMILY VIEWING and SPEAKING PARTS.  This new film is being
marketed as a black comedy.  Don't you believe it!  It is a serious
movie about values, seeking values, defining values, putting the price
on values, as it were.  In doing this, Egoyan weaves together three
stories, each one of which out-Lynches David Lynch at every turn for
bizarre situations and unlikely plot turns.  This is a strange,
ambiguous movie never goes out of its way to explain itself, but I doubt
you will find much that is comedic about it, even though it is witty and
canny as hell.  You will likely find it fascinating and surprising right
to the end.
     Elias Koteas plays Noah Render, the insurance adjuster who devotes
himself utterly and compulsively to the needs of his clients, who all
seem to be victims of fires.  He takes charge of their lives while they
are in the bureaucratic limbo of waiting to get their claims processed.
He puts them up in the same motel, he visits them daily, he even sleep
with them if that's what they need.  Amy Taubin in the Village Voice
calls him a "compassion junkie", which pretty much says it.  Of course,
what an insurance adjuster does is determine the value of what is lost.
His fallacy is thinking that what is lost can be regained, but he
determinedly tries to put a value on everything, even in coito.
     He lives in a model home in a bankrupt housing development that
otherwise consists of scalped ground and signs showing the house that
will never be built there.  He shares this house with Hera, her
Armenian-speaking sister, and Hera's young son.  You might think you
understand the relationships here, but there's a chance you're wrong.
     Hera, played by Arsinee Khanjian, is a censor.  She spends her days
viewing apparently horrific pornographic films and classifying the ways
each violates some code of moral values.  Her sister has taken an
interest in her work, too.
     Then there is the story of Bubba and Mimi (played by Maury Chaykin
and Gabrielle Rose, respectively).  Was Bubba a filthy street person
Mimi assaults on the subway, or is it one of her elaborate, kinky
fantasies?  As Bubba explains later, "They have everything, or at least
the means to have everything, they want, but they don't know what they
need, so they try different things."  Their ultimate try-out results in,
inter alia, uniting the three threads of the film.
     THE ADJUSTER gets off to one of those starts where you think the
film is never going to let you in on its secrets, but it does at its own
pace.  I think the pace could have been tighter, but that's just about
my only cavil.  The pacing problem is a problem at all because the
characters are all so emotionally dead; most of the time they brood.
Bubba and Mimi are pretty lively, but even Bubba can express himself
only with pauses you could drive a Mack truck through.  The actors are
uniformly excellent.
     I can cheerfully recommend THE ADJUSTER to any fan of Egoyan or Wim
Wenders, whose style makes similar demands of the viewer.  It is an odd
movie, but a uniquely satisfying one, one you will think and talk about
some time to come.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Atom Egoyan
Starring: Elias Kosteas, Arsinée Khanjian, Maury Chaykin, Gabrielle
Rose, David Hemblen, Jennifer Dale, Don McKellar, Rose Sarkisyan, Armen
Kokorian, Jacqueline Samuda, Gérard Parkes, Patricia Collins, Stephen
Ouimette, Raoul Trujillo, Tony Nardi, Paul Bettis
One of the true joys in this life is watching an Atom Egoyan film.  The
Armenian-Canadian director of such films as "Speaking Parts," "Exotica,"
and "The Sweet Hereafter" structures his films like no one else does: as
a complicated puzzle of characters that the viewer has to piece
together.  Events are presented in a bizarre manner with no explanation,
but later on, they are never blatantly explained, but cunningly hinted
at.  While this may piss off a lotta people, who are more adept at
trying to sympathize with someone and make a straight-laced film out of
it, others will find it to be as enjoyable as doing the Jumbo every day.
There's not really any plot, but we do get three weird tales interlacing
with one another throughout the film.  The Insurance Adjuster of the
title is Noah (Elias Kosteas), who's job it is to claim everything that
was lost in an accident, and generally take care of his clients.  But
Noah is a workaholic.  He works any hour of the day to help out his
clients in any way possible, even sexually.
He lives in a house with his family in a once-budding development that
went bankrupt in production and left it being the only house built
amongst the dirt.  Around their house are signs for houses to be built
later on, but no soon signs of any development.  In the house with him
is his wife, Hera (Egoyan's real wife, Arsinée Khanjian), their son
(Armen Kokorian), and Hera's sister (Rose Sarkisyan), who we barely see.
Meanwhile Hera works as a film censor, watching pornographic films all
day, and pushing buttons to show each censoring problem with the films. 
However, she brings along a small camcorder with her to tape them
uneditied.  Does she get off on it?  Is there another reason she does
it?  But the answer will come soon after a young censor (Don McKellar)
catches her and alerts her violation to their boss (Egoyan regular David
Hemblen).
The other story deals with a bizarre rich couple - Bubba and Mimi (other
Egoyan regulars, Maury Chaykin and Gabrielle Rose, respectively) - who
use their wealth to stage bizarre fantasy acts, sometimes dealing with
some kind of weird sex act.  Their first scene in the film shows Bubba
disguised as a bum on a subway train (where Hera is) and Mimi dressed
like a business woman, and her sitting next to him, grabbing his hand,
and sticking it up her skirt.
Every scene in the film has a weird, unnerving feeling, and is presented
in the most loose, and surreal manner possible.  Every scene is
presented this way because Egoyan wants us to piece everything together,
and therefore every scene is at least 70% more weird than it would be if
we knew the facts surrounding it.  A lot of people who see his films
will probably walk out or give up early on in the film because they're
presented this way, and those who stay might not even understand it
completely by the final frame.  I can't say I can explain this
perfectly, but the film has remained with me, it's images and scenes
stapled into my brain to think about over and over again.
Although the film has a bizarre and creepy atmosphere, Egoyan has said
that this is basically a black comedy.  The characters all do bizarre
things, and the only reason we don't laugh at many of the things they do
(although I did crack up in a scene where Mimi pretends to be a
flirtatious cheerleader in front of about six horny football players) is
because we're not sure what to think of them until later on in the
film.  This kind of struture allows many things to become a mystery even
after the film and to alienate its viewer's emotionally.
But this film is not trying to depress us or even make us cry.  It's a
puzzle, with lots of themes going through it about materialism and sex
being presented, not a normal film with characters you can sympathize
with or a plot you can follow without thinking.  Egoyan's films,
especially his earlier kinkier films, are an aquired taste, mainly
constructed for people who love to do all sorts of puzzles, but those
who do must also be able to tolerate all sorts of bizarre sexual
instances.  But if you can piece it together, it's extremely rewarding.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
