Title
Review for Scorpio Rising (1964)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Faust667@aol.com
Kenneth Anger's "Scorpio Rising" is one of the most revolutionary films of 
the past forty years. It set a whole new precedent to filmmaking in general, 
in terms of its fast cutting style, rock n' roll montages, rebellious allure 
of motorcyclists, sex, death, and so on. In fact, I may be so bold as to say 
that this is the first sex, drugs and rock n' roll movie ever made. And Anger 
did it all in less than half-an-hour of film time. 
As director Anger recently explained about his most famous (or infamous) 
short film, "Scorpio Rising" is an ironic take on "The Wild Bunch," the 
latter being a fairly tame motorcycle movie next to this one. In fact, 
"Scorpio Rising" is all about irony, and yet it says something rather 
disconcerting about the world in America before the love generation and the 
decadence of the 1970's set in. At times, "Scorpio Rising" seems to be an 
ironic take on the 1950's yet commenting on the growing motorcycle cult of 
the late 1960's. Anger even dedicated the film to the Hell's Angels. 
"Scorpio Rising" begins with average men in their late teens or early 
twenties polishing and fixing their precious bikes (or as Anger referred to 
them as "Christmas tree versions of motorcycles".) They are inside their 
garages, and we hear lovely pop songs in the background as the camera tracks 
back and forth between the bikers and their bikes, wind-up toys of 
motorbikes, and a prominent visage of a skull in the background. Later, we 
see the bikers dressing up in their uniforms, a combination of leather 
jackets and straps to the tune of Bobby Vinton's "Blue Velvet." The irony 
begins again, as the song has the lyric, "She wore blue velvet," yet we see a 
blonde biker dressing up wearing a blue shirt and a black leather jacket. As 
photographed in close-up, along with subliminal shots of a barechested biker, 
there is a definite homoerotic subtext occurring here, as there was with 
Anger's first film "Fireworks" where Anger played a 17-year-old kid who 
dreams of being sodomized and beaten by Navy officers. There is one shot in 
"Scorpio" of the barechested biker standing over a cone pointing to his 
crotch. Most of "Scorpio Rising" has sexual connotations in every shot, 
especially the Halloween party where costumed, masked guests stand around 
having sex with their genitalia clearly exposed (the version I saw had such 
moments blotted out since it was from a Japanese laserdisc). 
"Scorpio Rising" combines elements of teen rebellion, popular culture, Nazi 
ideology, the motorcycle cult, sex, rock n' roll, religion, and death and it 
twists such elements around to form a rather haunting collage about the 
inevitable decline of the western civilization as we know it. And every 
sequence has a rock and roll song or some sentimental ditty playing on the 
soundtrack. "Scorpio Rising" is the first film to ever build a montage of 
shots with songs, and to do so ironically. If you are wondering where Martin 
Scorsese, Quentin Tarantino, Paul Thomas Anderson, Wes Anderson and any 
filmmaker since, not to mention MTV, got their ideas for their famous use of 
ironic pop songs as subtext or montage, look no further back than "Scorpio 
Rising." Another ironic fact is that the film was brought up on obscenity 
charges back in 1964, yet no one noticed the use of songs in the soundtrack 
which Anger had no permission to use. Since then, the film has been tough to 
find in video stores because the rights to such songs are still in a legal 
tangle.
"Scorpio Rising" is a frenetically charged, highly potent piece of cinema and 
it is guaranteed to still provoke anger (especially the use of the swastiza 
symbol). It was a sign of things to come, long before the advent of the 
post-60's youth rebellion in films such as "The Graduate," or youth violence 
in "A Clockwork Orange." There is of course the nineties equivalent of both, 
"Natural Born Killers." It all began with Anger's film, and we can either be 
grateful or unforgiving.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Kenneth Anger's "Scorpio Rising" is one of the most revolutionary films of 
the past forty years. It set a whole new precedent to filmmaking in general, 
in terms of its fast cutting style, rock n' roll montages, rebellious allure 
of motorcyclists, sex, death, and so on. In fact, I may be so bold as to say 
that this is the first sex, drugs and rock n' roll movie ever made. And Anger 
did it all in less than half-an-hour of film time. 
As director Anger recently explained about his most famous (or infamous) 
short film, "Scorpio Rising" is an ironic take on "The Wild Bunch," the 
latter being a fairly tame motorcycle movie next to this one. In fact, 
"Scorpio Rising" is all about irony, and yet it says something rather 
disconcerting about the world in America before the love generation and the 
decadence of the 1970's set in. At times, "Scorpio Rising" seems to be an 
ironic take on the 1950's yet commenting on the growing motorcycle cult of 
the late 1960's. Anger even dedicated the film to the Hell's Angels. 
"Scorpio Rising" begins with average men in their late teens or early 
twenties polishing and fixing their precious bikes (or as Anger referred to 
them as "Christmas tree versions of motorcycles".) They are inside their 
garages, and we hear lovely pop songs in the background as the camera tracks 
back and forth between the bikers and their bikes, wind-up toys of 
motorbikes, and a prominent visage of a skull in the background. Later, we 
see the bikers dressing up in their uniforms, a combination of leather 
jackets and straps to the tune of Bobby Vinton's "Blue Velvet." The irony 
begins again, as the song has the lyric, "She wore blue velvet," yet we see a 
blonde biker dressing up wearing a blue shirt and a black leather jacket. As 
photographed in close-up, along with subliminal shots of a barechested biker, 
there is a definite homoerotic subtext occurring here, as there was with 
Anger's first film "Fireworks" where Anger played a 17-year-old kid who 
dreams of being sodomized and beaten by Navy officers. There is one shot in 
"Scorpio" of the barechested biker standing over a cone pointing to his 
crotch. Most of "Scorpio Rising" has sexual connotations in every shot, 
especially the Halloween party where costumed, masked guests stand around 
having sex with their genitalia clearly exposed (the version I saw had such 
moments blotted out since it was from a Japanese laserdisc). 
"Scorpio Rising" combines elements of teen rebellion, popular culture, Nazi 
ideology, the motorcycle cult, sex, rock n' roll, religion, and death and it 
twists such elements around to form a rather haunting collage about the 
inevitable decline of the western civilization as we know it. And every 
sequence has a rock and roll song or some sentimental ditty playing on the 
soundtrack. "Scorpio Rising" is the first film to ever build a montage of 
shots with songs, and to do so ironically. If you are wondering where Martin 
Scorsese, Quentin Tarantino, Paul Thomas Anderson, Wes Anderson and any 
filmmaker since, not to mention MTV, got their ideas for their famous use of 
ironic pop songs as subtext or montage, look no further back than "Scorpio 
Rising." Another ironic fact is that the film was brought up on obscenity 
charges back in 1964, yet no one noticed the use of songs in the soundtrack 
which Anger had no permission to use. Since then, the film has been tough to 
find in video stores because the rights to such songs are still in a legal 
tangle.
"Scorpio Rising" is a frenetically charged, highly potent piece of cinema and 
it is guaranteed to still provoke anger (especially the use of the swastiza 
symbol). It was a sign of things to come, long before the advent of the 
post-60's youth rebellion in films such as "The Graduate," or youth violence 
in "A Clockwork Orange." There is of course the nineties equivalent of both, 
"Natural Born Killers." It all began with Anger's film, and we can either be 
grateful or unforgiving. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
