Title
Review for Lust och f√§gring stor (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The story takes place in Malmo, Sweden, in 1943, a couple of years
before WW II came to an end.  Although Sweden is neutral, it has a
submarine, WOLF, which it sends out on a shakedown cruise.
     Back in Malmo, the school term has begun.  A new teacher has been
hired.  She is Viola (Marika Lagercrantz), a 37-year-old pretty woman
who has had much difficulty since she married Frank (Tomas Von Brmssen)
a traveling salesman who is not much good at his job, is also an
alcoholic who never stops drinking.  In addition, he is wont to go to
bed with other women despite his being married.
     Viola's students are about 15 years old.  One of them is a tall
handsome blond boy, Stig, (Johan Widerberg, who happens to be the son
of the film director).  Despite the age difference of 22 years, Viola
seduces Stig to the point where neither can think of much else but
going to bed.  As one might anticipate there will be no happy ending
to the people involved.
     Stig has a next door neighbor, a pretty, wholesome-looking girl,
Lisbet (Karin Huldt), the same age as Stig on whom she has a strong
crush.  Poor Lisbet is heartbroken because although she throws herself
on Stig he appears to be entirely disinterested.
     Others in the cast are Sig's brother, Sigge, (Bjrn Kjellman) who
has enlisted to sail on the submarine.  Their mother is played by Nina
Gunke.
     Directed by Bo Widerberg who also wrote and edited the film.  If
he had deleted about 10 minutes' worth of film, (128 minutes) it would
not have hurt.  Despite that, it is an excellent film, highly
recommended. Among Widerberg's many films, perhaps the best known is
the fine Elvira Madigan, made some 9 years ago.
