Title
Review for Federal Hill (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Nicholas Turturro, Anthony De Sando, Libby Langdon, 
          Michael Raynor, Jason Andrews, Robert Turano, Frank Vincent 
Director: Michael Corrente
Producer: Michael Corrente 
Screenplay: Michael Corrente
Cinematography: Richard Crudo
Music: David Bravo and Bob Held 
Distributed by Trimark Pictures 
     Those leaving FEDERAL HILL with a strong sense of deja vu can be
forgiven for that impression.  With the possible exception of utilizing
an atypical location (Providence, Rhode Island's Federal Hill as
opposed to New York City or Long Island), there is little in this film
that hasn't been done before, and better.
     With a moody score and crisp black-and-white cinematography, the
opening scene of FEDERAL HILL, which features the burglary of an
upscale Providence residence, promises a lot more than the rest of the
film is able to deliver.  From this point on, the movie quickly
degenerates into an amalgamation of situations and characters pilfered
from such efforts as AMONGST FRIENDS, A BRONX TALE, and others.
     The story centers around a group of five twenty-something
friends:  Ralph (Nicholas Turturro), Nicky (Anthony De Sando), Frank
(Michael Raynor), Bobby (Jason Andrews), and Joey (Robert Turano), each
of whom is given a subplot that contributes to the whole.  Ralph, the
son of a mentally ill bricklayer, does his work by night, getting both
his kicks and his income from robbing rich people's houses.  Nicky,
Ralph's best friend and cousin, is a small-time cocaine dealer.  Frank,
the son of a local mobster (GOODFELLAS' Frank Vincent), is constantly
trying to prove his worth.  Bobby is a loser in debt for $30,000 to a
loan shark, and Joey is an ex-con trying to deal with a nagging wife.
Also thrown into the mix is Wendy (Libby Langdon), a Brown University
student who becomes involved with Nicky.
     The interaction of these characters, which is intended to form the
backbone of FEDERAL HILL, is more than passingly reminiscent of what
went on in Rob Weiss' AMONGST FRIENDS, a far better chronicle of
fractured friendships and criminal appeal.  Moments of originality are
scarce here.  Apparently, writer/director Michael Corrente found it
less demanding to plunder previous genre entries than strike out in a
new direction.
     Character development is sketchy at best, with no real growth
apparent in anyone.  This is certainly due in large part to a script
that is more concerned with a story than with those the story is about,
but the weak (and largely inexperienced) cast cannot be completely
absolved.  With the exceptions of Nicholas Turturro, whose performance
as Ralph is suitably manic, and the vastly-underused Frank Vincent,
none of the actors excel.  Especially disappointing are Anthony De
Sando and Libby Langdon, who are frequently unconvincing in central
roles.  The supposed chemistry between them never gives off more than
fitful sparks.
     It has been repeatedly proven that, when a connection is made with
the audience, unpleasant characters often make the most fascinating
protagonists (for a recent example, take a look at Quentin Tarantino's
PULP FICTION).  In FEDERAL HILL, however, Corrente's attempts to forge
that link are largely unsuccessful, resulting in a bunch of small-time
hoods that it's difficult to care about one way or another.
     It's somewhat mystifying why this film has received acclaim at
several international film festivals.  Perhaps there is a fascination
with certain, admittedly-colorful elements of the Italian-American
community (this is no GODFATHER or GOODFELLAS, but vestiges of those
pictures' "flavor" has been retained).  Regardless, despite a solidly-
constructed story line, FEDERAL HILL is one of the least innovative or
interesting American independent films to come along this year.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Every big city in the U.S. has an area that is decayed, decadent,
drug-ridden, and inhabited by punks.   In Providence, R.I., for the
past 50 years, the area is Federal Hill.  Here you can find the gangs
with their intense devotion to each other and their families but punks,
nevertheless.  When a film is made about them I expect it has a point
(BOYZ IN THE HOOD).  This one does not.
     Nick (Anthony De Santo) and Ralph (Nicholas Turturro) grew up in
Federal Hill.  The only world they know is what happens in their
neighborhood, what they can see from the top of the Hill.  This limits
their interests to what is bounded by their neighborhood and limits
their horizons.  They do not expect to better themselves nor, for the
most, will they.  In fact, they are drones, completely lacking in any
aspirations.
     Close by, but a million miles away in every other way, is Brown
University where the rich send their kids.  One of the students, a
Senior, Wendy (Libby Langdon), enters Federal Hill to scout for some
drugs for the Senior Prom.   When she meets one of the Federal Hill
residents, Nicky, she falls for him ... or so we are asked to believe
by the filmmakers; a rather strong dose of incredibility for us to
swallow.   There is no chance that Wendy's parents will accept Nicky
and how Nicky can ever believe that he would be is nonsense.
     In any case, Nicky and his friend have been to long involved with
the Federal Hill activities and no good will come of that.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Michael Corrente is a young filmmaker who has financed, written,
and directed his own film.  Both the director's story and the film's
story have a ring of familiarity.  Corrente's history is a parallel of
Barry Levison's.  Each chose as a first film to tell the story of his
small ring of friends, but somewhat fictionalized.  Each made a good
film on a very low budget.  And though Levison had a much better feel
for memorable characters in his DINER than Corrente does with FEDERAL
HILL, each made an impressive first film.  One thing we can conclude is
that Levison grew up in a better neighborhood.  Much of what Corrente
tells of his friends has a sting reminiscent of GOODFELLAS and MEAN
STREETS.
     Ralph, Nicky, Frank, Joey, and Bobby (played respectively by
Nicholas Turturro, Anthony DeSando, Michael Raynor, Robert Tutano, and
Jason Andrews) are friends who grew up together in Federal Hill, the
heavily Italian-American section of Providence, Rhode Island.  Each of
the friends is connected with crime in one way or another.  Ralph robs
houses; Nicky deals cocaine; Bobby is a loser who deals in counterfeit
money and owes the big boys $30,000.  Joey is nearly straight.  He did
time after doing a job with buddies who left him holding the bag.  Now
he has a wife and his worst crime is violating parole by gambling with
his buddies.  Frank is the only one of the guys who is straight and who
tries to keep the others out of trouble.  He can afford to be straight-
--his father is a local boss in the syndicate.  When Nicky meets a
cute, rich Brown student (Libby Langdon, wife of Michael Corrente) he
has visions of marrying her.  But getting in the way is Ralph, a loose
cannon who is getting into bigger crime.  He wants to pull his
housemate and best friend Nicky in with him, but he is willing to
settle for dragging in Bobby.
     The plot of FEDERAL HILL works just a little too predictably and
melodramatically.  Following the well-worn conventions of films like
THE GODFATHER, the plot gets more and more taut as the story proceeds
until it seems inevitable that there will be violence.  The formula is
followed down even to the cooking scene where we learn how to make some
terrific Italian dish (in this case a tempting Aglio e Olio with
Parmesan cheese).
     Whether this film will be a star-maker the way DINER was is still
in question.  Certainly none of the actors in the film has the same
sort of screen presence of the characters of DINER.  Nicholas Turturro,
who gives the film what modest acting flash it has, has gone on to
television work.  Libby Langdon is attractive as Wendy, but she simply
fails to do much with her character beyond what was on the printed page
of the script.  Probably what sets this film apart from others in its
class is the mood effect created by black-and-white photography.
     As a first film this low-budget, semi-autobiographical crime film
is polished and has some interesting moves that make the familiar
aspects seem a little fresher.  The true test for Corrente will be the
second film.  This one gets a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Perhaps the second film should be THE MAKING OF FEDERAL HILL.
Corrente has a number of interesting stories to tell about how the film
was made.  One of the better ones involves his refusal to use a union
crew in order to save money.  Apparently the local union wanted to hire
an enforcer to break Corrente's legs to teach him a lesson.  "I can't
do that," the enforcer said, "Michael Corrente is my little brother."
"Oh.  Okay," the union rep said.  "Gee, what a small, funny world this
is!"
