Title
Review for Temptation (1994/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
It seems that Jeff Fahey had certain tendency for the roles
of seamen, because his character in TEMPTATION, 1994 film by
Strathford Hamilton, was very similar to the character the
same actor had played in WOMAN OF DESIRE one year earlier.
Here he plays Eddie Lanarsky, former sailor who spent five
years in prison for the failed insurance scam. His partner
in crime, Michael Reddick (Philip Casnoff) is married to
rich and beautiful Lee (Alison Doody). Together with his
friend Bone (David Keith), Eddie boards Lee's yacht as
sailor, in order to asks some questions his former partner.
That would provide a lot of drama during the cruise, but
Michael has a very sinister plan of his own.
Compared with WOMAN OF DESIRE, this combination of
"whodunit", action and erotic thriller looks like a
masterpiece of style and intelligence. However, compared
with any average thriller, TEMPTATION is rather forgettable.
Filled with cliches, mostly predictable plot twists -
Elisabethan bloodbath in the finale being one of them - it
works only because of nice scenery. Part of that scenery is
Patricia Durham, exotic beauty who doesn't mind revealing
her body and playing the erotic scenes. Problem is, those
scenes are set in the wrong places of the movie, seem
totally implausible, and finally, just illustrate how corny
this film is. Same effect is with the musical score by
Conrad Pope who uses too much motives of Goldsmith's BASIC
INSTINCT. The actors are mostly fine, but it is shame to see
Alison Doody, former romantic interest of Indiana Jones in
THE LAST CRUSADE, using her talents in B-grade confection
like this. Unlike Patricia Durham, she doesn't appear naked,
but I doubt that even such drastic measure would make this
film better than average.
