Title
Review for Great Gatsby, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE GREAT GATSBY (1974) Directed by Britisher Jack Clayton. 
F. Scott Fitzgerald's moody novel of the 1920's jazz age was 
adapted by Francis Ford Coppola, given sumptuous visuals by 
cinematographer Douglas Slocombe and designer John Box (both 
British), and a very interesting cast: Robert Redford ( too 
much of a one-note Gatsby), Mia Farrow ( a vague Daisy 
Buchanan), Bruce Dern ( a disgusting Tom Buchanan) , Sam 
Waterston ( a homely, unsmiling chorus as Nick Carraway) , 
Lois Chiles (Jordan Baker, Nick's friend), Howard Da Silva 
(Meyer Wolfsheim), and others. When this adaptation came out 
it was negatively received and became a fiasco. Opinions 
ought to be revised upwards. The film is quite faithful to 
the book but it has a number of irritating qualities. Its 
144 minutes are too protracted; the tempo is slow; the 
pregnant silences are overdone; many shots  are drawn-out 
and much dialogue, or rather speeches, as mostly people 
speak solo even when two are involved. Hardly any of this 
speech has a natural rhythm.The sound is dubbed, too much 
so. It has an echoey quality which is excellent when it 
stresses the vastness of Gatsby's house, but then this 
spreads to other sounds and speeches.  There's an overdone 
moody solemnity about the picture. Yet , at the same time, 
the film has fine moments and a great deal of touching 
melancholy and Fitzgeraldian disenchantment. Flaws 
notwithstanding, the actors are affecting. Nelson Riddle 
contributes a wonderful 20's score with mood-enhancing songs 
(sometimes also too artsily  slowed-down) like "What'll I 
do?", "When You and I were 17," or "Every Morning, Every 
Evening." Seen with commercials, this movie becomes endless. 
But without them, it is, on balance, very much worth 
watching or taping. (Edwin Jahiel)
