Title
Review for Deep Cover (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
The Phantom
     (With this review, the Phantom is continuing his effort to review
other than just horror films.  Though the stupefying BASIC INSTINCT
nearly caused him to give up in despair, he soon realized that it was
less than likely that all new exploitation films could be as bad as
Verhoeven's big-budget bomb; thus, he has persevered and with this
review turned his attention to the action genre.  Sorry, no bleached
blonde bisexual ice-pick killers this time, phans.)
     BASIC INSTINCT notwithstanding, there is no inherent reason why
exploitation films have to be bad -- it's just that they so frequently
are.  Yet some of the most enjoyable films ever made are exploitation
films, and given the increasing acceptance of bloodshed, four-letter
words, and nudity in mainstream Hollywood films, there is sometimes
little or no difference between a big-budget, respectable studio release
and a low-budget crowd-pleaser -- except the budget.
     DEEP COVER, the subject of this review, is such a film, for while
it has all the hallmarks of an exploitation film -- from its low budget,
to the marketing it has received, to its target audience -- it's also a
literate, thought-provoking, and entertaining film that undeservedly may
be overlooked because of its subject matter, its budget, or its limited
release.
     As the lights dimmed at the UA Criterion 7 (formerly the UA
Criterion 6 before management decided to pay for much-needed renovations
by splitting one adequate-sized theater into two cinematic bowling
alleys) in the heart of Times Square, the Phantom expected little more
from DEEP COVER than its slightly sleazy trailers and print ads
promised: Larry Fishburne as an undercover cop who gets involved with
various bad guys and kills them.  As an added bonus -- and for a bit of
not-so-new-anymore role reversal -- the film throws in Jeff Goldblum as
a white drug dealer who becomes partners with Fishburne LETHAL
WEAPON-like before he's either shown the error of his ways or the inside
of an ambulance (frequently one in the same thing in standard-issue
exploitation films).  Add to the mix a pumping soundtrack, some
large-caliber weapons, a generous supply of talcum powder masquerading
as cocaine, and as many car chases as the filmmakers can squeeze out of
a severely limited budget, and you have yourself one fairly decent,
low-rent NEW JACK CITY clone.
     Or do you?  For surprise of surprises, DEEP COVER has a little more
to offer its audience than just the standard mix of glamorous cops and
glamorous drug dealers getting into glamorous shootouts, only pausing
long enough to tell the children in the audience that they shouldn't try
any of this at home, and that even though everyone in the film seems to
be enjoying himself, everything they're doing and saying is wrong, bad,
and evil.  Remember, winners don't do drugs and kill people; they just
pay $7.50 to see other people do drugs and kill people.
     But DEEP COVER goes a little deeper than this, and that makes all
the difference.  To start, it has a quite literate script (by Michael
Tolkin and Henry Bean, who wrote the excellent new film THE PLAYER and
INTERNAL AFFAIRS respectively).  Too, it has a director who apparently
learned how to direct by doing something other than watching MTV.  Bill
Duke, who's previous feature A RAGE IN HARLEM was not entirely
successful, but was at least an honest effort, brings a steady hand to
the proceedings, and he nimbly avoids most of the cliches of the action
film genre while still giving DEEP COVER a unique and attractive look.
Most important (for an exploitation film), he keeps the film moving even
when the screen isn't filled with car chases or shootouts.
     Further helping to lift DEEP COVER from the mire of a standard
action flick are Fishburne and Goldblum's performances, which are for
the most part restrained, in character, and effective.  True, seeing
Jeff Goldblum on cocaine is a lot like seeing Jeff Goldblum not on
cocaine, but his hyperactive performance is perfect for the fast-talking
lawyer/drug dealer he plays in the film.  And Fishburne -- obviously
slumming here after his outstanding performances in Spike Lee's SCHOOL
DAZE and John Singleton's BOYZ IN THE HOOD -- succeeds in giving his
character the thoughtful, introspective demeanor upon which the story
hinges.
     DEEP COVER sets out to explore what happens to Russell Stevens, a
troubled but dedicated cop who badly wants to make a difference and is
offered the opportunity to go undercover as part of an operation to nab
high-level drug dealers.  As part of his cover, Stevens (renamed John
Hull for the role) must himself pose as a drug dealer -- exactly the
kind of person he joined the force to fight -- and work his way closer
to the heart of one of the major illicit drug operations on the West
Coast.  Will he become corrupted by the easy money?  Seduced by his
great-looking new suits?  If you can't guess, you haven't seen enough of
these kinds of films.  Yet it is, still, a fascinating and dark journey
that we take with Fishburne's character, and the screenplay rarely comes
up for air once Hull takes to the streets.
     Unfortunately, there are a few not-so-fascinating things about the
film; among them the rather convoluted plot, a hodgepodge of
stereotypical characters and scenes, insightful and well-written moments
of introspection, and preposterous conspiracy theories.  The incessant
narration also does the film more harm than good; though it is
occasionally helpful to hear exactly what Hull is thinking at any given
moment, it would be better if we could ourselves realize what's going
through his mind by actually watching the film -- more or less what we
all came to Times Square that evening to do -- rather than by being told
straight out by the writers of an occasionally lazy screenplay.  The
Phantom's belief that narration is often more like having a loud-mouth
three rows behind you constantly telling you exactly what's plainly
going on before your eyes than it is a legitimate cinematic technique
has not changed due to the generally unnecessary and overbearing
narration in DEEP COVER.
     But putting this aside -- something that is easy enough to do,
given the low expectations that most of us have for an exploitation film
-- DEEP COVER turns out to be more entertaining, thought-provoking and
fun than it has any right to be.  Its limited budget shows -- and shows
frequently -- but the film is generally not hampered by an inability to
open things up a little, be it having more than 12 people on the street
at any one time, to running car chases through other than completely
deserted streets and tunnels.  Its weak and predictable ending is more
than compensated for by a very strong opening, and although the
screenplay calls for three or four more characters than the film itself
can really sustain (including Clarence Williams III as an honest cop who
tries to save Hull from his life of crime), it also works well enough,
often enough, and in enough other ways, that we really don't mind.
     DEEP COVER is in fact more like SERPICO than it is like NEW JACK
CITY (though it's not nearly as good as SERPICO); although it glamorizes
what it should probably be demonizing, it's more than just a all-surface
effort.  DEEP COVER is the kind of film that gives the term "B movie" a
good name, and the Phantom suggests that phans awaiting the imminent
release of LETHAL 3 give DEEP COVER a try and see for themselves why
entertainment and intelligence don't necessarily have to be mutually
exclusive.
