Title
Review for I Like It Like That (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I LIKE IT LIKE THAT is the first major studio film written and
directed by a black woman.  When actually watching the film it
generally flows fairly smoothly, though in retrospect the styles
represented in the film are very much a mixed bag.  To have in a single
film sex scenes verging on slapstick and grim scenes of street violence
makes one wonder if the writer/director, Darnell Martin, was managing
the tone of the film as a whole or in pieces.  It almost seems as if
she was optimizing individual scenes without thinking of the film as a
whole.  The unevenness of tone extends even to the title.  This is a
film with a lot of people at various levels of dissatisfaction which
would much more aptly be titled I HATE IT LIKE THIS
     In a Puerto Rican neighborhood in the Bronx, the street constantly
boils with activity, but nowhere more than the bedroom of Lisette and
Chino (played by Lauren Velez and Jon Seda).  Chino is into marathon
love-making, much to the amusement of the neighborhood and the boredom
of Lisette.  Chino feeds a family of five on a McJob but wants to
provide some luxuries for his family.  A blackout brings what Chino
sees as an opportunity.  Now Lisette has to feed a family of four and
visit a husband in jail on no job at all.  But a rather contrived set
of circumstances gets Lisette a high-paying job in the recording
industry working closely with a slightly sleazy executive (Griffin
Dunne) who is sexually attracted to her.  Rumors of her having been
seen with the executive reach Chino in prison and when he is released
he wants to set matters straight.  What ensues is a comedy-drama of
Lisette's on-again off-again relationship with her husband and the
struggle of the family to pull together.
     At times the film achieves some of the strengths of MARTY as
self-seeking family and friends try to interfere in the relationship of
Lisette and Chino, but with the exception of a surprisingly well-drawn
and acted Li'l Chino, played by ten-year-old Tomas Melly, most of the
peripheral characters are a bit cartoonish.  Griffin Dunne's record
executive is a one-dimensional cliche.  Rita Moreno as Chino's overly
strident mother is magnetic but more in her delivery than in her lines.
Jesse Borego is a bit too swishy and over-the-top as Alex/Alexis,
Lisette's brother, soon to be sister.  Velez's performance as Lisette
is the heart of the story and she does carry the film, though not
always with sufficient help from the script.  One scene of her handling
her tension by suddenly flashing into a dance just does not seem
realistic and Velez handles it as well as any actress could.  Seda only
at times develops a screen presence.
     Martin could well turn out to be a very good director, but her
technique needs refining.  I would give this film a low +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Darnell Martin
Starring: Lauren Velez, Jon Seda, Rita Moreno, Griffin Dunne
     Darnell Martin complained that the distribution company was
marketing her film based on the fact that she is a minority woman.  She
felt it implied the film otherwise wasn't very good, and needed special
consideration.  The film is good, however; quite good.  Part of what
makes it original is the fact that a minority woman is the lead
character.  Even in the new wave of minority written and produced
films, women are often relegated into demeaning stereotypical roles.
Lauren Velez,who plays the central character in this film, breaks out
of these stereotypes.  She is average looking and intelligent, unlike
the bubble-headed beauty queens that generally populate films.  It is
the men in her Bronx, New York neighborhood that become cartoonish
stereotypes.  Her husband, played by Job Seda,  is more concerned with
the perception of his machismo than providing for his family.  His
friends are an affably misguided group of ne'er-do-wells.
     The plot walks a fine line between reality and satire.  Elements
like a transvestite brother saving money for a sex change, a
hot-to-trot neighbor, and a WASP salsa record promoter (Griffin Dunne)
could have been easily lampooned.  Director Darnell Martin chose the
hard road and treats all the characters with respect.  This makes the
problems that the lead character faces, like getting enough money to
keep her family off of welfare, real problems.  The events leading up
to her financial situation have a funny side to them, but after the few
jokes, the situation remains.  It is here that Darnell Martin makes her
statements.  The male characters are willing enough to be around for
the good time, but unwilling to deal with the aftermath.  Unclaimed or
unsupervised children abound in the film, with women characters begging
the fathers to own up to their responsibility.  Men want women for show
at parties, but have to be blackmailed into letting them actually use
their mental talents on a daily basis.
      If the film broke down into the men being buffoons and the women
being abused saints, it would be easy to dismiss the film as a
diatribe.  Fortunately, some of the female characters are willing
enough to make fools of themselves.  Oscar winner (for WEST SIDE
STORY) Rita Moreno paints an unflattering comic portrait of the
intrusive mother-in-law.  She dislikes Velez because she has some
African heritage, while all of her son's side of the family is "pure
Castillian".  The one character that makes the most sense is the
transvestite.
     This film is another low budget wonder.  It manages to be part
Cinderella story, while still letting people solve their own problems.
A lot of films recently have shown the exteriors of lower income urban
neighborhoods, only to show lavish sound stage interiors inhabited by
rich drug lords. I LIKE IT LIKE THAT takes you inside to see how real
people live.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The first major motion picture made by an African=American woman
(as if that matters), I LIKE IT LIKE THAT is one of the best romantic
comedies you'll see on screen this year.
     The story is about the emotional, sexual, and economic pressures
faced by a lower-income Latino couple; two young people trying to raise
their kids in an aggressive Bronx neighborhood.  "Street life" is
tough, but Lisette and Chino (Velez and Seda) have stayed together for
ten years.  That is, until a citywide blackout changes their lives
forever.
     Writer/director Darnell Martin does the impossible here,
maintaining a breezy, easy tone while incorporating the grim realities
of urban living.  She keeps her film funny-- sometimes *too* funny--
and never turns away the more sensitive subjects. Watch how smoothly
she handles Chino's eleventh-hour encounter with a neighborhood drug
dealer.
     Her film is also very sexual, though neither offensive nor
pornographic (in case you live in North Carolina and happen to be
consuming alcohol at the time of viewing).  The opening sequence, for
example, centers on Chico's, ahem, "staying power."

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  10/14/94 (NY, LA); 10/21/94 (elsewhere) 
Running Length:  1:47 
Rated:  R (Language, sexual situations, violence, mature themes) 
     Writer/director Darnell Martin, filming her first feature, was
determined that the final version of I LIKE IT LIKE THAT would match
her initial intent.  Despite pleas and threats from Columbia (who
bankrolled the project), she would not add to or alter certain scenes
to increase their sentimental content, nor would she make changes to
advance the film's likelihood of pleasing crowds.  When the producers
asked for something that was not part of Martin's script, she
categorically refused to capitulate, at one point expressing a
willingness to see the picture shelved rather than tampered with.
     The result is a film with a clear sense of vision.  I LIKE IT LIKE
THAT has its share of minor glitches and problems, but its overall
depiction of life in the Bronx's Latino community comes across with
startling clarity.  Martin's film is a frantic work, with the chaos
surrounding her main characters vividly presented.  Many times, so much
is transpiring on screen that it's difficult to know what to focus on.
     Similar in theme and content to Allison Anders' MI VIDA LOCA, I
LIKE IT LIKE THAT tells the story of Lisette Linares (Lauren Velez), a
young wife and mother struggling to cope while her husband Chino (Jon
Seda) is in jail.  Without a job, she has no money; hence, no way to
bail him out, feed the children, or keep the youngest one in diapers.
Her only support comes from her cross-dressing brother Alexis (Jesse
Borrego), who offers advice rather than money (he's saving up for a
sex-change operation).  When she finally gets a job opportunity as an
assistant to music producer Stephen Price (Griffin Dunne), everyone in
the neighborhood misunderstands her relationship with the white guy in
a hot car, and the salacious gossip eventually makes it back to the
jailed Chino.
     At first glance, I LIKE IT LIKE THAT might appear to be yet
another in the rapidly-expanding catalog of "life on the street"
stories.  This film's tone is distinct, however, with a polished style
more reminiscent of Spike Lee's CROOKLYN than the numerous "grittier"
ghetto tales.  This is not a low-budget production, and it shows.
     Martin sets up two different worlds: the Bronx, with its poverty,
stoop-sitting, and drug deals; and the working world to which Lisette
escapes each day.  In every way, the portrayal of the former is
stronger than the latter.  When it comes to the streets and apartments
of a decaying neighborhood, Martin's feel for setting is on-target, and
at times almost overpowering.  In the offices and restaurants where
Stephen Price hangs out, however, things are not as well-defined.
     The dynamics of the central relationship between Lisette and
Chino, while following a fairly traditional arc, are interesting
because of the characters' multi-dimensionality.  Strongly independent,
Lisette needs a source of freedom and solitude, and a means away from
home of reinforcing her sense of self-worth.  These things she finds in
her job.  Chino, on the other hand, is defined by traditional macho
attitudes.  He doesn't want his wife to work--supporting the family is
his responsibility.  How these two balance their dreams and fears with
the need to care for their children represents the movie's most
engaging aspect.
     Occasionally, Martin is over-reliant on facile plot devices, and a
few of I LIKE IT LIKE THAT's scenes have a self-conscious feel (this
mostly occurs when the script attempts to force a comic moment rather
than letting the humor occur naturally).  The two "weak links" are
Dunne's Price and Rita Moreno's Rosaria Linares (the "wicked
mother-in-law"), both of whom are relatively uninteresting types.
Rosaria's primary reason for inclusion appears to be for comic relief.
     In a high-voltage screen debut, Lauren Velez captures the
audience's attention and keeps it riveted.  She outshines the rest of
the cast, including the respected veterans.  Films of this sort demand
strong lead performers, and I LIKE IT LIKE THAT has a standout.
     Movies in the 'hood often feature heavy smatterings of violence,
but I LIKE IT LIKE THAT is more often concerned with emotional scarring
than the physical equivalent.  There are moments when beatings are
shown (obliquely or directly) but, with the exception of a
brief-but-telling scene, guns do not play a role.
     I LIKE IT LIKE THAT comes roaring off the screen with intensity, a
loud soundtrack, and a lot of fast-paced dialogue.  Focused in purpose
and adept in execution, the movie provides a new window into inner city
life.  While the themes and subjects are not unique, the manner of
their presentation is, and for that we can be thankful to Darnell
Martin for her obdurate attitude when faced with producers more
interested in box office grosses than artistic content.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
