Title
Review for Captain Eo (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Michael Jackson is "Captain Eo," the leader of a space crew.   They
have messed up every mission given to them.  If they mess up one more
time, it will be their last mission.The crew is being sent to a planet
to bring a gift of peace to the ruler of the planet.  "Captain Eo" is
playing, and has been for several years, at Walt Disney World's Epcot
Center.  It is directed by Francis Ford Coppola, the director of THE
GODFATHER trilogy, and is presented to you in the polarized 3-D
technology.  
     I'm not writing a review on this film, per se, but just giving
some comments on it.  This film, I think, makes good use of the 3-D.  It
uses a few of the old 3-D tricks of shooting things out over the
audiences' heads, but mostly the 3-D is used to give the film depth.
This use of depth makes the film seem more realistic.
     Since I first saw "Captain Eo" several years ago, Disney has added
"in-theater effects."  I feel that these "in theater effects" were a big
mistake.  Some of the effects are lights flashing in the back of the
theater to simulate gun fire and smoke coming out from under the screen.
I found the flashing lights to be very distracting and the smoke covered
up part of the screen.
     The film has a good message behind it, well, don't all Disney
films.  The message in "Captain Eo" was to have world peace.   This
message is presented primarily in song form.  The songs are well done
and are sung by Michael Jackson, who has a good voice when he uses it.
The overall quality of the film is very good and I would suggest that if
you are ever in Epcot Center you go and watch the film.
