Title
Review for Tongues Untied (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
     I have seen "Tongues Untied" twice so far, once in a local
(Rochester NY) theater which shows foreign/independent/classic movies,
and once on our local public television station.  It is a film about
black gay male life, told in a poetic narrative style from the point of
view of people living the life.  I thought it was a moving film, funny
and intriguing in some places, sad and beautiful in others, and
potentially (not to me, but I can acknowledge the potential)
in-your-face offensive in a few places.  I thought the part with the
snap divas was a howler (loved that "sling snap"), and was fascinated to
watch the voguers dancing.  The format was a little hard to follow the
first time, but I still enjoyed the film, and it's even better the
second time.
     I did not like PARIS IS BURNING as much, though parts of it were
absorbing as well.  It is a documentary about mostly black gay male life
in Harlem at the drag balls, featuring sequences of drag balls and
interviews with voguers and "house" matriarchs.  "Tongues Untied"
reached more of my heart.  Perhaps that is because "Tongues Untied" is
told from several insiders' positions, as opposed to the
"observer/interview" mode of PARIS IS BURNING.  However, both of these
films have valuable insights.  As a white, heterosexual woman, I can
attest that these aren"t just "specialized audience" movies.  The mixed
audiences seemed to agree with me, judging from their reactions.
