Title
Review for Revenge (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
     In several respects, the Kevin Costner movie REVENGE is like his
earlier film NO WAY OUT: each movie is about a military man having an
affair with the wrong woman at the wrong time.  In both films, Costner
finds himself in over his head, tip toeing through a delicate situation.
Both films are charged with sexual energy.  However, there is a key
difference between REVENGE and NO WAY OUT: NO WAY OUT didn't fall apart
until its disappointing conclusion.  REVENGE, on the other hand, starts to
capsize immediately.
     REVENGE tries to pack the emotional wallop of a BODY HEAT or FATAL
ATTRACTION, but the routine story line prevents the film from delivering a
knock-out blow.  Costner plays Jay Cochran, a recently retired navy pilot
who drives down to Puerta Vallarta to visit his friend Tiburon Mendez, a
powerful Mexican millionaire played by Anthony Quinn.  Cochran is
immediately drawn to Mendez's stunningly beautiful wife, Miryea (Madeleine
Stowe), and he finds himself torn between his passion for her and his
loyalty to a longtime friend.  As the title suggests, REVENGE chronicles
the violent repercussions of the inevitable affair.
     REVENGE is a sinking vessel, but it's buoyed by its magnetic crew.
As usual, Costner has that earnest, boy-next-door quality that made him so
appealing in FIELD OF DREAMS.  He seems like someone you'd want your sister
to marry, which makes it hard to buy him as a cold-blooded killer in the
second half of the film.  As Miryea, Stowe exudes a tantalizing aura of
mystery, vulnerability, and raw sex appeal.  Quinn has the thankless task
of playing a rather standard tyrant who's violent, ruthless, and
unforgiving.  Quinn's dynamic presence, however, makes the familiar role
more distinctive than it might have been in someone else's hands.
     The first half of REVENGE is moderately successful.  As Costner and
Stowe fall in love, the film crackles with erotic tension.  The most
sensuous scene has Costner trying to make lemonade as Stowe does her best
to seduce him.  The image of Costner nervously trying to slice lemons is
far more memorable than any of the steamy sex scenes.  The second half of
the film, unfortunately, is unpleasantly brutal and bloody.  To add insult
to injury, REVENGE has a "so what?" quality about it.  Aside from the
gorgeous Mexican scenery, the film is unexceptional.  It plods along
predictably until the pull-out-the-kleenex conclusion.
     Worst of all: the plot depends on the lovers' making really dumb
mistakes.  Costner and Stowe are unbelievably naive when it comes to hiding
their affair, and the screenwriters are unbelievably naive to think that
we'll accept such stupid characters.  If the lovers had any common sense or
discretion, then the plot would crumble, making all the revenge nonsense
unnecessary.  But because the characters are idiots, they have no way out.
