Title
Review for Josh and S.A.M. (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
John Walker
     "Expectations" may be an obsession of mine, but I'll say it:  *If
you can park virtually every expectation at the door*, this will be a
flick that can become addictive.
     It will hit you on more levels than most three other movies.  It's
a romp--the sort of thing lots of us wanted to do as kids--screw
everything, grab a car, and beat it for the border.  It's an
adventure--where the stakes are high, and the hero must play everything
right or face disaster.  It's a comedy--where adults are somewhat
silly, and two kids create their own universe.  It's sort of like a
horror story, but without magic or the supernatural--where the demons
are utterly ordinary people doing ordinary sorts of things.  And it's a
morality play--where the hero has to face himself and his own actions.
     But if you can't park the expectations, you may very well hit a
wall with this film.  Others have.
     Josh (Jacob Tierney), a 12-year-old or so, and Sam (Noah Fleiss),
8 or so, are brothers.  Their parents (Stephen Tobolowsky and Joan
Allen) are divorced.  Sam is sweet kid, a natural jock, and bright--but
withdrawn.  The other kids call him "Robot" and "Alien".  Josh is one
of those kids who has given the word "hacker" a bad name.  Besides the
usual computer stuff, he duplicates credit-card magnetic strips to use
the accounts of his mother's boyfriend.
     Josh also lies a lot.  After the kids get sent to the father's for
the end of the summer, Josh's opening gambit (besides previous stories
about the boyfriend) is to tell Sam that he (Sam) is really a
Strategically Altered Mutant (S.A.M.), and to generate documents to
"prove" it.  Sam believes it--and the further lies that he's set to
be sold to the Pentagon to be a child warrior and that his only hope is
to escape to Canada.
     When the two are going to be suddenly shuttled back to Mom for a
farewell because she's leaving for Europe and dumping them with Dad for
a year, Josh embarks on still further lies, that lead to mistaken/fake
identity, and a crunch where he has to kill a violent drunk (Chris
Penn).  (At least Josh thinks he's killed him; he can't find a pulse.)
     In any event, now they *both* have reason to clear the territory.
They steal the drunk's rental car and make their move.  Along the way,
they'll pick up a friendly hitch-hiker, Alison (Martha Plimpton).  But
it ain't gonna be smooth sailing.
     When I talk to anyone about a movie, I try to think of two things:
what did I go through in seeing the flick, and what do I think other
people will do.  I'd like to flag things things that I think others
have missed, either to warn people of a negative *before* they go, or
to point out something that might be attractive.
     Before I saw JOSH AND S.A.M., I had signals from two quarters:  1)
Stanley Drew Rosenbaum (rosenbau@ucsu.Colorado.EDU); and 2) the reviews
of a) James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) and b) Scott Renshaw,
Stanford University (AS.IDC@forsythe.stanford.edu (IDC Database)).
     Rosenbaum seemed to be describing JOSH AND S.A.M. as what I'd call
"a romp"--fun, plain and simple.  (I refer you to "The JOSH and
S.A.M. Audience Participation Guide 1.2" rec.arts.movies thread, among
others.)
     Well, I'd give a note of caution there.  (I'd caution you about
doing the Guide's "vocal" parts in a first-run theater!)  After the
movie jelled, I was wired throughout it.  It wasn't simply a nifty
comedy.  For me, it was an adventure.
     The only image I have is that it was like falling onto a sled in
winter and going down a totally new hill.  In one sense, you're in
complete control: turn left, turn right, shift your weight here, drag
your foot just a little bit there, the sled goes where you tell it.
But there are rocks and trees everywhere, and you can't see very far
ahead.
     The one thing you can never do is *stop*.  Try, and body parts
will be decorating the landscape.  All you can do is hope that the
trail you're making doesn't go off a ledge somewhere, or smack into a
dead-end rock.
     One test of a movie is whether my attention wanders, whether I
think of other stuff while it's running.  Two ideas came up, one right
after another--only a few times, and JOSH AND S.A.M.  immediately got
my attention again.  The *second* thing was "What's gonna happen?!
How's it gonna *end*!?"  I could only see terror and disaster.  That is
*not* what I think of during a light comedy!  (Maybe I have a problem
with getting into films too easily.)
     So, I think I'll use the Guide for *later* viewings, when I'm not
so wired.  (Let it be noted, however, that if I go to a theater that
sells hot dogs, it will be positively disloyal not to buy one or two!
Candy bars just won't cut it.  Also, the half-pepperoni, half-pineapple
pizza *has* acquired a permanent significance.  It has only a small
role in the film, but I will nonetheless concede to Rosenbaum that it
must now be regarded as a cultural icon!)
     But I said that my fear of the end was the *second* thing--what
was the first?  It was "they [meaning: lots of you folks] are *not*
gonna believe this."  The closest I could come to finding a neutral
term to describe why was "a pervasive air of unreality".  And I don't
like that term, because in some sense, this film is completely
realistic--after you concede *one* premise.
     Although I disagree with their conclusions, I have to thank both
Berardinelli and Renshaw for stating the real problem very clearly:
Berardinelli:
>How much are you willing to suspend your disbelief?  In the answer to
>that question lies the degree to which you'll buy into the underlying
>premise of JOSH AND S.A.M, and how much you will therefore enjoy it.
Renshaw:
>     Every once in a while, I come upon a movie where I simply can't
>get beyond the basic premise; as well as certain individual elements
>might be executed, I'm so turned off by that premise that I can't
>possibly enjoy the film.
     (Note: I want to thank them both for stating the real problem.
Too few reviewers in the general press warn us of the decisions *we*
make that can radically alter our perception of a film.  However, now
I'm going to go into what *I* think the root premises of JOSH AND
S.A.M. are.  I don't want to imply that I'm representing what
*Berardinelli or Renshaw* view as the premises.)
     To some extent, I think there are *at least* two premises involved
in people's perception of JOSH AND S.A.M., but they will both stick in
the craw for some people.
     The *false* premise, as far as I can see, is to view Josh and Sam
as poor-little-abused-kids, or poor-little-disturbed-kids.  To mix
comedy with such kids is unacceptable: "poor-little-abused-or-
disturbed-kids never have a nice day."
     Well, first, that's *false* about kids in trouble in the real
world.  Humor is sometimes what keeps them *alive*.  Presenting *both*
the humorous aspects *and* the abuse can make a film a lot truer than
keeping each in its own tidy little niche.
     Regardless of that, however, it's *false* about the film.  The
screenplay (by Frank Deese) has to walk a very fine line, and does so.
Josh and Sam are neither abused nor disturbed--at least no more so
than lots of the rest of us.
     Yes, the mother seems too self-concerned.  Yes, the boyfriend
seems like a Continental lounge lizard.  Yes, the father is a bit of a
jerk.  Yes, his two stepsons are dumb and smug and worse jerks.  Yes,
Josh and Sam have both coped poorly with the breakup, Josh by
withdrawing into computers and lying and petty larceny, Sam by
withdrawing into himself except to get into fights.
     *None of those are neat things*, and the screenplay does not pass
them off as trivial.  They're real.  For Josh and Sam, they could
develop into *major* problems, and right now the parents are doing
*nothing* constructive.  But those problems are not yet the stuff of
high melodrama--sympathy and concern, yes, but not pegging Josh and
Sam as basket cases or everyone else as creeps.  No matter how lousy
their situations are, many kids go through similar things--*most*
pull out of them before things become a disaster.  Yes, some don't, and
maybe Josh and Sam were turning into two who wouldn't.  But that point
hadn't been reached yet.
     (If either Josh or Sam is a bona fide basket case, we shouldn't
even *think* about what many average kids are--much less the average
USENET reader!)
     But there's another premise, and it's this one I think that gives
JOSH AND S.A.M. an air of unreality.  It's remarkably simple.
     Josh is a liar, right?  He can tell his mother lies about her
boyfriend; she ignores him.  But when he once tells Sam that Sam is a
mutant, the lying game changes.  Sam *believes* him.  Why?  Because it
*fits*.  He's really got a lot of electronics inside?  It explains
*everything*.  Why he feels cold inside, why the other kids think he's
an alien, a robot, why he thinks about being dead.
     You and I can see those as the result of his not being able to
handle the breakup.  But for Sam, that's just how he *feels*.  Now he's
got an *explanation*.  (Do you remember when it seemed entirely
plausible that if you swallowed an orange seed, it would sprout into a
tree in your stomach?  Or lots of comparable ideas?)
     With further lies, the same thing will happen to Josh again:
people will *believe* him.  The film establishes clearly that Josh's
lies--*for the people he tells them to*--will be *plausible*, even
*wanted*.  Worse, when he tries to call a lie back, they won't believe
him; they'll have too much invested in the belief.  Or they'll be out
for revenge at being betrayed.  He will have to follow the lie out to
its end--even if it means apparently killing someone.
     Josh tells a series of lies that leads to that event--after
that, the escape.
     Now, I've said that Josh's lies will be believed.  What if they
would be *real*?  What sort of a story would we have then?  We'd have a
story line that goes back to Midas and underlies any number of horror
stories: What you *say* (want, ask for, etc.) becomes *real*--the
protagonist calls the demon into being and must thereupon destroy it or
be destroyed.  JOSH AND S.A.M. is a non-magical, utterly "realistic"
working out of the same idea.
     *That* strikes me as the root premise of JOSH AND S.A.M..  If
you're willing to accept that premise, JOSH AND S.A.M. can be a romp or
an adventure, but the events of the story do *not* thereafter require
any great suspension of disbelief.
     The premise itself doesn't seem to be that strange.  It's starkly
simple.  It's a traditional staple of literature dealing with the
supernatural.  What's so wrong with giving a perfectly naturalistic
interpretation?  It's been used in comedy.  And haven't we seen small
cases like it in real life?
     Of course, maybe we'd rather not think too closely about what it
would be like if everything we *said* were believed or actually came
true!
     But conceding the premise can do more than simply allow us to
enjoy a romp or and adventure.  It also opens up a further layer of
meaning.  Josh has to deal with the consequences of his words.  And his
habit of casual lying can no longer be casual.  Now, even if *must*
lie, he has to realize that his words have consequences.  It's no
longer a game.
     When Sam buys into the S.A.M. lie so completely, Josh realizes how
cruel he's been--to someone who has never done anything to him.  Josh
has to face the fact that Sam is a nice sweet kid that he's been
jealous of because Sam can do things that he finds next to impossible.
     The movie, then, is to some extent more about Josh than Sam
because Josh created the lies, and must work them out.  Sam's working
out of the lies is his own journey, too, but it's also under Josh's
tutelage.  (I would like to write something strictly from Sam's
perspective, but, let's face it, this review is already *huge*!)
     Seeing JOSH AND S.A.M. as a morality play eases one criticism that
some have made.  The hitch-hiker--Alison--has been seen as a
possible romantic interest for Josh.  But nothing is made of it.  Why
is her character given short shrift?
     Well, first, Josh is *12*!  Alison, is *at least* 20-something,
and has had a *lot* of hard time.  She's far from bonkers, but she's
not totally with us when she shows up, and it's dealing with Josh and
Sam that brings her closer to reality.
     If this were a simple coming-of-age flick, then, yes, she'd be
important for the possible romantic interest, even as "the older
woman".  But if it's *not*, if it's really Josh's dealing with the
demons he's called into being, then her role is radically
different--and probably parallel to Josh's.
     Sorry, going further would take up too much space--and go right
into spoiler territory.
     I had one disappointment: The scene where Josh's lies produce the
mistaken/fake identity.  This was the one place where I think JOSH AND
S.A.M. was trying for stock comedy.
     The comic scene reminded me of "I Love Lucy" shows where Lucy was
digging herself in deeper.  Now, I happen to know that lots and lots of
people think such scenes are funny.  When I watched "Lucy" as a kid,
they drove me up a wall.  I'd cover my ears and scratch my head until
the scene was over.  (Hey--no remote control--no mute!) Very little
got through the noise.  Just enough so I'd know it was safe to listen
again.
     It's embarrassing, but I've been so wrapped up in the story that I
haven't mentioned the actors.  In that regard, I get the impression
that I can safely refer you to practically anybody for an opinion.
People may criticize the film, but the acting seems totally beyond
criticism.  Tierney and Fleiss are simply excellent.
The thing that sort of shocked me was that I felt they were *real
kids*!  Somehow, actors always look like actors to me.  Maybe it's just
a pervasive air of unreality to all movies.  I just don't think I'll
meet the people on the screen when I go outside the theater.
     With Tierney and Fleiss, it was like two kids from outside had
somehow gotten on screen.  The acting doesn't come across as acting:
they just do things, and it happens to be on screen.  I never once got
the idea that one of them was going too far or not far enough; there
weren't any wrong notes.  I wasn't watching either one of them play a
role; I was just seeing them in situations.  How much of that is their
own talent, how much is the result of careful cultivation by the
director (Billy Weber), I don't know.  But it was there.
     It might well be that their unstoppable realism nullified any
hesitations I might have had about the story's reality.
     So, where does all this leave us?  Well, note what I said about
"Lucy."  Some of you like, some dislike "Lucy," some make a cult of it,
some hate it.  It would be fascinating to figure out why.  (I once saw
an article that cheerfully posited "Lucy" and "Gilligan's Island" as
symbolizing the great social/cultural divide of contemporary history.
I think I agree.)
     Regardless of the explanation or lack thereof, our preferences are
a fact.  Some will just not be able to get into the basic premise(s) of
JOSH AND S.A.M..  The question is the one I indicated at the very
beginning: *Can you park virtually every expectation at the door?*
     If you can't, you may very well hit a wall.  But if you *can*, I
think JOSH AND S.A.M. will pay off.  This is one film where our
expectations, our demand for something to fit into preconceived niches,
is the real objection.  JOSH AND S.A.M. doesn't just break a niche or
two, it obliterates them.  It creates it own, and gives you multiple
layers to explore.
a) Ya gotta have someone to talk it over with.  And b) even if the
theater management doesn't object, pizza is a mess to eat in the
dark!
     I wonder whether some of you may be thinking that this is *not*
the thing young minds should be exposed to.  We have a larcenous liar
who's cruel to his brother.  They heist a car, pick up a babe, and make
for the border.  Since you've probably assumed (correctly) that it has
a happy ending, that means that Josh gets off scot-free.  Lie through
your teeth, do credit-card fraud, steal cars, and you, too, can become
a cult-hero for it!
     Well, we don't know he gets off absolutely scot-free.  But it's
the most plausible explanation.
     But when you see it as a morality tale, then it all fits.  The
only way he realizes how down his brother is, is by seeing him buy what
started out as just one of his snotty tricks.  *Then* he sees that
they're cruel, and not just wiseguy stuff.
     Further, the whole journey becomes one of Josh's trying to get Sam
*out* of the lie.  He can't let Sam go on alone.  Nothing else counts.
Moreover, he comes to realize that his lies can't just be withdrawn.
"I'm sorry" doesn't cut it.  He has to face the fact that he put Sam in
the lie, and he has to go in and get him out.  That's his first task.
His own safety comes second.  (Note that the reason he's really in
jeopardy is because he had to protect Sam from getting hit by the
drunk.)  All the other lies are beasts/demons that must be defeated on
their own turf, not just disappeared by admitting he lied.
     None of this is laid on with a trowel.  There's no card at the end
giving the moral of the tale.  The moral (or morals) is (or are) there
nonetheless, sometimes explicitly (as when Josh tells Sam about
forgiveness), sometimes implicitly (as when the lies turn out to mean
more to others than they mean to him).
     Admittedly, a little preaching might be better for younger kids.
But it would be a turn-off for almost everyone else.  But with this
review in hand, you at least have fuel for a little discussion of your
own.
     True, there's always the chance you'll notice your 12-year-old
going over road maps and casting lusting eyes on the family
conveyance.  If so, the only thing I can say is that he was probably
doing so beforehand.  Now, (since presumably you, too, will have seen
the movie) you will at least be alert to the warning signs!
John Walker, walkerj@access.digex.net

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Every once in a while, I come upon a movie where I simply can't
get beyond the basic premise; as well as certain individual elements
might be executed, I'm so turned off by that premise that I can't
possibly enjoy the film.  Such was the case with last year's RADIO
FLYER, where children in a dysfunctional household were used as the
launching pad for an adventure.  Now comes JOSH AND S.A.M., similarly
focused on the exploits of two troubled kids, and again my rejection
mechanism kicked in.  There is some charm to be found in the
performances, but overall it simply depressed me, and wrapped up a
disturbing package far too neatly.
     JOSH AND S.A.M. is the story of two children struggling to cope
with their parents' divorce.  12-year-old Josh (Jacob Tierney) is a shy
computer whiz who prefers living with mom; 8-year-old Sam (Noah Fleiss)
is a fight-prone daydreamer who enjoys time with dad (Stephen
Tobolowsky).  On one visit with their father's new family in Florida
tensions boil over between the brothers, and Josh convinces Sam that
he's a Strategically Altered Mutant, or S.A.M.  Josh uses the deception
in an attempt to run away, but instead the boys end up on the road
together, depending on each other and a friendly hitchhiker (Martha
Plimpton).
     JOSH AND S.A.M. hinges on the fact that Sam almost immediately
believes the improbable story that he is a genetically engineered
fighter, the evidence consisting of "documents" that Josh has mocked up
on his father's computer.  It's a stretch to accept that Sam would buy
such a ridiculous concept, especially when he knows his brother is so
adept with computers.  Screenwriter Frank Deese attempts to bypass this
plausibility problem by having Sam say that the "fact" that he is an
S.A.M. explains why he thinks about being dead all the time.  Suddenly
JOSH AND S.A.M. becomes the tale of a cruel prank perpetrated on a
deeply disturbed little boy, and it becomes extremely unpleasant to
watch.  These problems are further compounded when JOSH AND S.A.M. aims
for an inappropriately upbeat conclusion.  The two children are
repeatedly treated with cruelty and inconsideration by their parents
and extended families, and these issues are almost completely glossed
over.  Dad makes a relatively sincere apology, but for a film which
uses serious family problems to set up its hijinks, it's
disappointingly timid in dealing with the repercussions.
     Its dark undertones are not the only problem with JOSH AND S.A.M.,
however.  A certain amount of contrivance is practically required in
capers such as this, but JOSH AND S.A.M. really pushes the envelope.
The event which forces Josh to run is a strained sequence involving
Chris Penn as a drunken Texan, and he really doesn't work.  Most
baffling is the role played by Martha Plimpton, an ill-defined runaway
who appears and disappears without leaving any recognizable imprint on
the story.  Somewhere in that character was a relevant back-story, but
it never made it to the screen.  There is even a tossed-off attempt to
make her a romantic interest for Josh, which is raised and resolved in
under five minutes of screen time.  JOSH AND S.A.M asks for far too
much leeway, and offers far too little reward in return.
     As disturbed and disappointed as I was in the story, I have to
acknowledge the appeal of the two lead performances.  Jacob Tierney is
very good as the bright and resourceful Josh, best of all in the
obligatory "fool the stupid cop" sequence, and Noah Fleiss brings real
heartbreak to the truly confused Sam.  The two are convincing brothers
throughout, and I liked the rapport between them.  Still, I found
myself dwelling on its handling of a serious subject matter in a manner
I found inappropriate.  There is no such thing as an objective review,
but in this case I can't even pretend otherwise.  I found nothing fun
about watching two kids in desperate need of therapy taking a joy
ride.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Josh (Jacob Tierney) and his brother Sam (Noah Fleiss) are on the
run, but they're not fleeing from circumstances that normally cause
kids to leave home.  Yes, there's a divorce in the family, Mom is about
to re- marry a stuck-up pig, and Dad's stepkids are real jerks, but
these are only a small part of the problem.  Josh is on the lam because
he thinks he killed an abusive drunk (Chris Penn), and Sam is with him
because he believes one of his brother's more wildly improbable
stories:  "S.A.M." is an acronym for Strategically Altered Mutant, and
he's about to be sold to the government to participate in a war in
Africa.  Together, the pair are headed for Canada and freedom.
     How much are you willing to suspend your disbelief?  In the answer
to that question lies the degree to which you'll buy into the
underlying premise of JOSH AND S.A.M, and how much you will therefore
enjoy it.  There are enough nice little touches to keep the mountain of
larger implausibilities cleverly camouflaged, but never completely
hidden.  As a result, while many individual scenes work quite well for
either comedic or dramatic value (more of the former than the latter),
the film as a whole is lacking.
     One of the most curious elements of JOSH AND S.A.M is the
inclusion of Martha Plimpton's Alison.  Talk about underdeveloped
characters and story potential left unearthed...  She starts out as a
plot device and never develops into much more, which is truly
unfortunate considering the rare glimpses that we're given of the
person beneath the toughened exterior.
     In many ways, this picture follows the time-honored pattern of
many so-called "road movies," albeit with protagonists of an unusually
young age.  Despite being brothers, Josh and Sam start out
antagonistic, and only through their various travels and travails do
they come to recognize how important each is to the other.  Kinship may
not be binding, but friendship is--or at least that's what JOSH AND
S.A.M would have you believe.
     Although the two main characters are kids (ages 12 and 7,
respectively), older viewers will get as much, or more, out of JOSH AND
S.A.M. than younger ones.  Some of the themes, and much of the humor,
will escape the pre-teen crowd.  Nevertheless, children will appreciate
the adventure, so for parents who don't mind a few four-letter words,
this is reasonable family entertainment.
     Jacob Tierney and Noah Fleiss are excellent child actors.
Tierney, the older of the two, has superior emotional range--his
quiet, honest reaction in the scene when his step-brothers are calling
him a "homo" shows a remarkable grasp of acting skill.  Josh's pain is
eloquently presented, but the emotion is never overplayed.  From
beginning to end, it's hard to find an instance where Jacob's work is
off-center.
     Noah Fleiss, while lacking the subtlety of his on-screen brother,
brings an element of energy and verve to his part.  Sam doesn't have
the depth of Josh, but Fleiss is capable enough to invest him with the
humanity necessary to avoid the "caricature trap."  It would have been
easy for Sam to become the whining little brother, but he's always more
than that (in fact, I don't think he ever whines).
     On the down side, almost every member of Josh and Sam's family
comes across as a one-dimensional stereotype--especially their
mother.  Played without flair by Joan Allen, this woman has no
personality whatsoever.  Oddly enough, originally Bebe Neuwirth was
hired for the part, but her portrayal was deemed "too unsympathetic."
When she was unavailable to re-shoot her scenes, the role was re-cast.
If this resulted in an improvement, it's not readily visible.
     The movie's greatest asset is its sense of humor.  The drama is
very much of the hit-and-miss variety, and the adventure element has
obvious limitations, but the comedy is fresh and inventive, and
provokes several hearty laughs.  Adults are often the butt of these
jokes, but almost all of them are funny because they're perceptive.
     First-time director Billy Weber has a good sense of pacing, and
JOSH AND S.A.M. never becomes dull or plodding.  This trait isn't
unexpected, since Weber's background is in editing.  His previous
credits include 48 HOURS, BEVERLY HILLS COP, and TOP GUN, for which he
earned an Academy Award Nomination.
     Perhaps the most curious thing about JOSH AND S.A.M. is the timing
of its release.  Initially, Castle Rock decided on a mid-August date.
This was scrapped by Columbia because of "unfavorable competition,"
leading to the next choice, which was mid-October.  However, for some
unfathomable reason, the October 15 opening was pushed back to November
24.  Now, coming out amidst a rush of gargantuan holiday films, JOSH
AND S.A.M has little chance of being seen by more than a handful of
people and, barring something unexpected, will vanish like a raindrop
in a pond, only to resurface shortly on video.
     JOSH AND S.A.M is capable of supplying a little over an hour and a
half's worth of entertainment.  Everything doesn't gel together, but
there's enough cleverness in the script to allow for a little
tolerance.  A great movie this isn't, but it has its moments.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
