Title
Review for Fruits de la passion, Les (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
William Tsun-Yuk Hsu
     After complaining for months that it's impossible to find Shuji Terayama's
films on video, by chance a friend spotted Klaus Kinski on the box of FLOWERS
OF PASSION and called my attention to it.  (If anyone has information on the
availability of Terayama's other films, I would love to hear from him.)
     FLOWERS OF PASSION is based on a story by Pauline Reage (who wrote THE
STORY OF O).  It is set in a mythical Robbe-Grillet-esque Hong Kong in the
1920's.  In fact the atmosphere and imagery in FLOWERS OF PASSION is very
similar to some of Robbe-Grillet's later novels, for example LA MAISON DE
RENDEZVOUS, with its surreal events, dream-like images, and themes of mental
and sexual bondage.  FLOWERS OF PASSION is (appropriately?)  produced by the
producer for Oshima's Bataille-esque IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES, and Peter, the
female impersonator who appears in many Kurosawa films, plays the madam of a
brothel.
     FLOWERS OF PASSION is beautifully photographed, and has many unforgettable
images (the elaborate toys in the brothel, "O" tied to a bed perching
precariously on a sloping roof with a bird on her torso, a prostitute drowns
herself in a river, and a piano floats up from the bottom of the river to prop
up her body).  There are many well-constructed scenes and lighting effects.
However, Terayama seems to have little to say beyond the cliches of French
decadent sexual philosophy (think of Bataille or de Sade; the film opens with a
Baudelaire quote).  He comes very close to capturing the atmosphere of books
like Robbe-Grillet's LA MAISON DE RENDEZVOUS, but without explicitly
challenging the preconceptions of viewer.
