Title
Review for Mobutu, roi du Zaďre (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mac VerStandig
---This review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/mobutu,_king_of_zaire.htm ---
There has long been a rumor that Mobutu Sese Seko staged random executions
of prisoners before 1972's Rumble in the Jungle boxing match between
Mohammed Ali and George Foreman. But you won't hear about that in Mobutu,
King of Zaire, a two-and-one-quarter hour documentary that seems to select
what it includes and what is excludes similarly to how Mobutu supposedly
selected the doomed prisoners. What the documentary does reiterate time and
again is that Mobutu was a beast  inhuman, amoral and money-hungry. To get
this point across, almost all references to the Zairian leader's family are
left on the editing room floor (a good director like Thierry Michel couldn't
humanize his untamed beast). Still, agenda or not, Michel has picked a
fascinating subject. Mobutu united, led and, ultimately, destroyed his
people in the name of money and power. At one point, in an old interview,
the leader points out the obvious when speaking in the first person:
`President Mobutu's fortune is greater than Zaire's debt.' So why was this
man capable of leading a country without rebellion for so long? `He had
become a god' wisely remarks an interviewee (although the infamous Chinese
system of making citizens ask for a different color ballot should they not
want to vote for their current leader couldn't have hurt). And that is
really the extent of the film: how many awful things this `god' did. Before
the end, you will see people hung, people beaten to death and other graphic,
haunting images. You will hear of even more, like when the leader apparently
drank a glass of human blood in hopes that it would make him more powerful.
It gets tired quickly. What doesn't, however, is Larry Delvin, one of the
interviewees. The former CIA chief in Zaire, Delvin reveals that the USA had
a way of physically terminating reigns of leaders that displeased
Washington. Fascinating as the CIA and Mobutu's wrath may be, the
anti-Mobutu propaganda rises to a level that takes the piece well beyond
most documentaries in terms of a slanted perspective. Perhaps that is where
the answer can found: Michel couldn't show America's favorite retired boxer
in a film about unadulterated evil, now could he?
