Title
Review for Snatch'd (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Kirk Douglas is still the Champion. In fact, this
affectionate story begins with photographs and clips from that 1949
film which catapulted him to stardom. In recent years, not only has
Douglas survived a helicopter crash that nearly cost him his life but
also a crippling stroke which left him with slurred speech. Now he's
back with vigor, delivering a courageous, inspirational performance as
irascible Harry Agensky, a former boxing champ known as the "Polish
Prince."  Resolutely practicing his facial and vocal exercises,
Harry's recovering from a stroke, along with the death of his beloved
wife of 45 years. But he's still feisty and ferocious, especially when
it comes to how he's going to spend the rest of his days. He's been
living uneasily with his dutiful older son (Kurt Fuller) in the
Canadian wilderness but, instead of an old-age home, he wants his own
place - with a companion to take care of him. The only way he can
swing it financially is to retrieve a cache of "magic diamonds" he
recalls hiding in the wall of a mobster's kitchen in Reno after he
threw a fight. Harry convinces his estranged younger son (Dan Aykroyd)
and teenage grandson (Corbin Allred) to take him on a life-changing
road trip that they both consider to be a fool's errand. Written by
Allan Aaron Katz and directed by John Asher, the touching but
two-dimensional story is corny, cliche-filled and contrived,
particularly when the trio make an improbable visit to a bucolic
bordello run by Lauren Bacall, who hasn't been paired with Douglas
since Young Man With a Horn (1950). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, Diamonds is a sentimental 7 with Douglas proclaiming, "Live each
day as if it were your last - and never give up!"  It's an optimistic,
engaging comedy-adventure, particularly for the geriatric crowd.
