Title
Review for Zone Troopers (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1986. Director - Danny Bilson, Screenplay - Bilson & Paul De Meo, 
Producer -De Meo , Photography - Mac Ahlberg, Music - Richard Band, 
Effects Animation - Tony Alderson, Makeup Effects - Magical Media 
Industries (Supervisor - John Carl Buechler), Production Design - 
Phillip Dean Foreman. Production Company - Empire Productions/Altar 
Productions.
Tim Thomerson (Sergeant Stone), Biff Manard (Charley Dolan), Art La 
Fleur (Corporal George `Mittens' Mittinsky), Timothy Van Patten (Joey 
Verona), William Paulson (The Alien), Peter Boom (Colonel Manheim)
Plot: Three GI's and a war correspondent, trapped behind Nazi lines 
during World War II, come upon a crashed spaceship that has been 
discovered by the German military. They make an escape from the Nazi 
camp with an alien visitor and run for their lives against the pursuing 
Nazi forces.
Before going onto mainstream success with the scripts for films like 
`Rocketeer' (1991) and creating tv series like `The Flash' (1990-1), 
`Viper' (1994-5, 1996- ) and `The Sentinel' (1996- ), the 
writing-sometimes directing team of Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo had an 
enterprising career in B-movies. They wrote a couple of the more 
out-and-out enjoyable films made by Charles and Albert Band's Empire 
Productions in the mid 1980s - `Trancers' aka Â‘Futurecop' (1985) and 
`Eliminators' (1986) - before debuting with this delightful effort.
Throughout all of Bilson and De Meo's films and tv series runs an 
enthusiasm for comic-books and sf fandom - the end credits here for 
instance are shown across mockups of pulp sf magazine covers. In `Zone 
Troopers' Bilson and De Meo make a splendid homage to WWII GI combat 
movies. The dialogue all comes with a delightful cod, cornball sincerity 
and the characters are deliberately cast as four-square stereotypes - 
the hardbitten, invincible, seemingly divinely protected sergeant, the 
wet-behind-the-ears enthusiastic kid - that could have stepped right out 
of the pages of a `Sergeant Rock' or `Commando' comic. Although it is 
all deliberated through a knowing sense of modern irony. In one amusing 
throwaway gag Tim Thomerson comes around and swings a punch, hitting an 
indistinctly-seen Nazi whereupon Biff Manard is given to wryly note 
"It's not everyone that gets to deck Adolf Hitler". Bilson and De Meo 
make excellent use of Empire's typically low budget. If the film didn't 
revel so much in being a B-movie, it could pass for a far better 
budgeted production. Even John Carl Buechler's usually cheap-looking 
creature effects seem quite serviceable for once. Bilson and De Meo milk 
the scenes with the GI's trying to find out what the alien eats 
(eventually finding it will only eat their cigarettes) or it manifesting 
their desires with an appealing sense of humour. The end credits quite 
charmingly announce: "Buy War Bonds - Available in the Lobby."

