Authors
Holiday Bob
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Tromeo and Juliet (1996)
I was lucky enough to be able to go to the premiere of "Tromeo and Juliet"
last night at the UCLA Film Archives.  They had a junk-food reception
beforehand, and a lot of the people involved with the film were there.
The movie is amazing!  It is definitely the best "extreme" film I ve ever
seen, and I think it will be an all-time cult classic.  The weird thing
for me is how much better this is than other Troma movies, twice as good
as anything coming out of that company, including "The Toxic Avenger,"
which is the only one of their films I sort of like as an actual film.  I
met three or four people from the movie, including one of the leads, and
was telling them this.  They said the reason it s so good is because the
credited director, Lloyd Kaufman, isn t the actual director.  The actual
director is James Gunn, who only gets co-screenwriting credit, and
whatever an "associate director" is supposed to be.  If you ve ever been
to Troma s web site, you know this guy because his name s plastered all
over it. 
Whatever the case, "Tromeo and Juliet" really shows that it was directed
by someone besides the person who directed "Sgt. Kabukiman."  And Gunn
obviously has a thousand times more talent than Kaufman.   The movie s
coming out Thanksgiving into theaters here in L.A., and I guess I think it
would be sort of a sin for anyone who says that they re into extreme
movies not to check it out.
