Authors
Joe Clark
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Hackers (1995)
You mustn't think Hackers is a craven movie-studio attempt to cash in
on the perceived popularity of la vie online. In fact, the word
"Internet" comes up only once in the film's 105 minutes, and is
uttered hammily at that. No, the film makes an honest attempt to view
the komputer-kid subculture as a group of actual kids who dig
computers, as opposed to geeks without life or love. And as in the
computer biz itself, Hackers is remarkably generous about who can jack
in.
Included in Hackers' fin-de-siecle family is Phantom Phreak (real name
Ramon, played by Renoly Santiago), a Latino dude with hair like Molly
Johnson who befriends the new kid in town, Dade Murphy (Jonnny Lee
Miller). You don't need a rap sheet as long as your arm to be a
somebody in the hacker circuit, and Dade's shutdown of 1,507 computers
in a single day (at age 11!) means his reputation precedes him as he
settles into a surprisingly shipshape New York high school. He's a
godlike figure, one on an inevitable course toward union with the only
grrrl hacker around, Kate Libby (Angelina Jolie).
Funny thing is, Phantom Phreak seems about as attached to
heterosexuality as his handle is to the letter F. As usual, he's not
explicitly queer, but he's certainly not explicitly straight. (This is
1995, and kids today are much less hung up about that gender shit.)
All that matters is ability, and the rainbow cast has that in
abundance. Even the lads with genuinely geeky tendencies have their
day.
Hackers' plot-- about an evil hacker with a lot of corporate toys to
play with who attempts to frame our hero and his posse for an act of
ecological destruction-- strains credulity as much as the hopelessly
inaccurate images displayed on various computer screens. Director Iain
Softley is more interested in playing with surfaces and emphasizing
the fluidity of identity and character in the online realm.
The way Phantom Phreak tags along with-- and nurtures-- Dade and Kate
conjures memories of doting Sal Mineo in Rebel Without a Cause. Razor
and Blade, two Japanese phone phreaks-cum-pirate-TV operators,
cross-dress via smart men's clothes and more make-up than a geisha but
suffer no hit to their street cred at all. There's a standing joke
about wearing a dress, and indeed, the souped-up paramilitary costumes
are another exemplar of the surfacing of fetish gear in pop culture.
Watch Kate's dream sequence for the most heterosexually queer 60
seconds of the year. And look closely at Jonnny Lee Miller as he
stares at his laptop; it's onto his face that Softley reflects some
implausible but beautiful fractal-like graphics. Miller's moles and
scratches and five-o'clock shadow and gloriously mismatched hair and
eyebrow colours are a living canvas of their own.
True to Hollywood form, Phantom Phreak doesn't get to kiss Dade on the
lips, as some of us might like; indeed, only Dade and Kate get to get
it on, in a closing-credits fuck that's both zipless and subaqueous.
The respectful, even-handed treatment of a wide-open culture that old
farts will never understand is what gives Hackers its currency. Here's
hoping for a sequel, in which Ramon's sex life becomes rather less
phantom and rather more phreaky.
Experimental design can pop up in the unlikeliest places, as Iain
Softley's 1995 film Hackers will attest. Art direction and set
decoration and production design are old hat in feature films, but
Softley's corny youth-oriented computer caper is that rarest of
things, a motion picture featuring actual graphic design.
That only makes sense, seeing as how virtually every character in the
flick has his or her eyes glued to a computer screen half the time.
Fading '80s wunderkind [2]Neville Brody designed the various computer
screens visible in the film, all of which vary in implausibility from
modest to hopeless. (Though millions of moviegoers use computers,
Hollywood hasn't figured out how to represent them realistically, even
in computer-centric movies.) Softley uses a few obvious filmic
techniques that show off the movie's graphic design: Unabashedly fake
mattes, like the face of hero Dade Murphy (Jonny Lee Miller)
superimposed on and dissolving into a "data soup" of swirling
mathematical equations, fractals, helices, and amoebas; quick intercut
images meant to link the virtual with the real, like an overhead view
of New York City that morphs into a salmon- and teal-hued circuit
board; a City of Text that models data as a forest of glowing
skyscrapers.
However, the big graphic surprise is Softley's innovative second-order
device of simply reflecting computer screens onto the actors' faces.
We see big fractal blobs ringed by diffuse wiggling flames; snippets
of blank photographic film, sprocket holes and all; sawtooth edges as
though cut by pinking shears; Roy Lichtenstein-style patterns of dots.
Nowhere are these projections more winsome than on Miller's face,
where they mix with his moles and scratches and five-o'clock shadow
and gloriously mismatched dyed hair and natural eyebrow colours to
form a living canvas.
Despite its threadbare storyline, Hackers is a must-see as one view of
a future in which graphics are quite literally a reflection of
computers and popular culture and aren't restricted to the high-class
gulag of coffee-table art books.

Title
Review for Virtuosity (1995)
You'd think the creators of a movie featuring both Denzel Washington
and Russell Crowe might have starstruck fags in mind, and in the case
of Virtuosity, you might be right. But prepare yourself for a slap in
the face even as the drool collects in your lap.
Afrikanski-Amerikanski heartthrob unit Denzel Washington plays Parker
Barnes, a murderer/ex-cop sprung from jail to track down and terminate
Sid 6.7, a composite of infamous killers' personality traits created
by a programmer named Lindenmeyer (Stephen Spinella, outfag actor of
Angels in America fame). Sid was devised as a virtual-reality
cop-training tool, but when the Sid project is threatened with
shutdown after a rather nasty software bug emerges, Lindenmeyer sets
Sid loose on the world with the help of nanotechnology, which turns a
virtual Sid into a real one formed from glass.
Sid is the real star here-- amoral and sexy, cold-blooded and
charming, murderous and fuckable. He's animated (literally) by Russell
Crowe, late of The Sum of Us; Crowe's wide-ranging acting talents
continue to impress, and the young Australian brilliantly imparts
Sid's single-minded intelligence, savoir-faire (savoir-tuer?), and
gleeful sadism. And as usual, Australians do better American accents
than Americans.
Sid's a bit of a rake, too-- and since he contains a dollop of Jeffrey
Dahmer, he has a way with the gents as well as the ladies. It's pretty
subtle-- a peck on the cheek; a remark that Denzel Washington is on
Sid's dance card; forcing a guy to strip so Sid can try on his suit--
but lighthearted and far less insidious than the rank aberrance of,
say, Scott Pritchard, the deranged queer military attache in No Way
Out. In a Van Damme-esque frisson of homoeroticism, Washington and
Crowe are both naked in the film (though not frontally); in a
shoot-'em-up movie, that's psychologically significant. (Who's the
main audience for action flicks? Guys. You figure it out.)
Still, Vito Russo is surely whirling in his grave at Lindenmeyer, a
stereotypical Hollywood sissy straight out of the '50s. Lindenmeyer's
faggotry is never stated outright, but we know the signs: Perennially
uptight in his three-piece suit, the friendless geek lives alone,
talks in a "typical gay voice" (is Spinella capable of any other
kind?), and jealously relishes how his creation toys with Madison
Carter (played by Kelly Lynch), a female criminologist who accompanies
Barnes on his quest for Sid. Oh, and he jerks off after conjuring a
naked Sid in the privacy of Lindenmeyer's own lab. This, we assume, is
a sign.
But getting all up in arms at yet another example of filmic homo
slander takes concentration, and Virtuosity's string of cinematic
references are quite enough to distract you. Early on, Denzel
Washington's dishevelment and demeanour recall his role as Steve Biko
in Cry Freedom. (What's more, Virtuosity's anticlimactic ending
mirrors that film's structure.) At one point Washington's fingers
linger over Lynch's as in Silence of the Lambs, but with the added
zing of miscegenation. Virtuosity's plot, editing and soundtrack are
Natural-Born Killers Lite. Saturday Night Fever is blatantly quoted in
a brief but funny vignette. Madison Carter is a science-fiction
reference: Edison Carter had a doppelgaenger named Max Headroom.
High-and-mighty Gitanes-smoking intellectual filmheads might dismiss
those quotations as a hollow pastiche, and indeed this is not The
Player, where the cavalcade of references made sense in a movie about
movies. But contrary to typical Hollywood formula, Washington and
Lynch don't get romantically involved, and for Washington there's no
happy ending. Virtuosity is a perplexing mishmash-- creative,
derivative, homoerotic, and homophobic all at once.

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
Collar enough Hollywood B-list actors for a single picture-- Gabriel
Byrne, Kevin Spacey, and a very greasy Stephen Baldwin, among others--
and boom, you've got a gestalt. Bryan Singer's The Usual Suspects sets
something of a high-water mark for the crime-gone-wrong genre and
rivals Pulp Fiction for moxie. Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie's
unrelentingly intelligent, multi-layered storyline is so intricate
that to tell you anything about the plot would set the rest of the
story unraveling. (Truly.)
So let's talk about subtext. This is a blood-stained but strangely
sexless guy movie. I counted all of four female characters, but they
barely surface amid the main cast's riptide of uneasy male
camaraderie. This is the '90s, so of course a palpable homo friction
is part of the weave; while it ain't homoerotic per se, it is
homo-interesting, with only one "fag" epithet to sock you in the eye.
Still, hyper-leftist cinephiles obsessed with the Holy Trinity of
minority representation ("in the name of the Gender, the Race, and the
Sexual Orientation") will have their hands full grappling with the
film's portrayal of disability: It's every bit as nuanced and depraved
as the disabled character himself. The Usual Suspects is exciting,
daring, and gripping, but it's also the most feverishly anti-crip
movie of the last 20 years, a fact I was almost enraptured enough to
forgive. Almost.
