Authors
Linda Dubler
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Shvitz, The (1993)
     Near the end of THE SHVITZ, a young man remembers a Yiddish word
that the old ladies of his childhood used to express their appreciation
of a visit to the steambaths.  "It's such a mecheieh," they'd say as
they splashed water on their ample bosoms, "such a pleasure."  The same
can be said of Jonathan Berman's intimate and affectionate film.  Shot
in a loose, cinema verite style, suffused with spontaneous humor and
propelled by a cast of natural storytellers, THE SHVITZ manages to make
the act of filming a bunch of naked strangers look effortless.  I
suppose it is relatively effortless to turn a camera on whatever or
whoever appears in front of the lens.  But to capture one's subject in
such a relaxed and casual a way, to present what would legitimately be
called oral history as a vivid and personal encounter, is  a challenge
that eludes many documentarians.
     What makes countless non-fiction films feel dull is the sense
that they are closed before they even open--they're codified,
defined, set up to deliver information and a point of view in the
manner of a dictionary or encyclopedia.  THE SHVITZ  is  dynamic in
part because it is structured as an inquiry.  Berman opens with the
most fundamental of questions--what is a shvitz?  From there, the
filmmaker launches into a search for the shvitz experience.  First stop
is Coney Island in the winter--a near empty boardwalk edged by
graffiti-splashed facades.  A conversation with a guy who remembers
the golden era when there were forty bathhouses in Coney Island alone
leads to a meeting with Ruby Jacobs, the owner of the Atlantis bar, who
once owned a number of baths himself.  An interview with a pack of
elderly fedora-hatted gentlemen, whose accents are as thick as their
mufflers, yields little but the comment that the shvitz is too
expensive now.  More helpful is a tiny old women with a face like a
dried apple doll's, who cheerfully extols the social pleasures of the
steambath:  "We tell jokes, we talk about intimate things, we laugh
about the men."
     Archival footage transports us back to the shtetl (village), to
the roots of the tradition.  A remarkably fit and sharp-witted man in
his eighties, the son of a cantor, recalls his first visit to the baths
at age four--"I couldn't take it" he says.  And then we're stepping
through the unassuming doorway of the Hope Avenue Russian Steambaths,
into the clutter of an ante room that looks surprisingly domestic.  A
few steps away lies the inner sanctum.  It's a simple chamber where the
patrons luxuriate like lazy walruses in the 260 degree heat, attended
to by a skinny naked man in a hat shaped like a flower pot, who lathers
them with oak leaves, splashes them with water, and at one point turns
to the filmmaker and says in stunning deadpan, "Kinda hot in here."
     Just as the advent of modern plumbing brought to an end the
widespread enjoyment of the shvitz, air conditioning has shaped a new,
less communal South.  THE SHVITZ may be a film about a northern, urban,
Jewish subculture, but the reason for its being--the need to
celebrate and preserve disappearing traditions--is close to
southerners.  Like an eager grandson, Berman has asked the right
questions and in THE SHVITZ he shares with us the loving answers.
