Authors
M. Doyle
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Sense and Sensibility (1995)
     I don't want to see another movie for the rest of the year.  To do
so would be to spoil the joy I experienced in seeing SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY.
     I'm hard-pressed to find the words to praise this movie.
Beautiful, funny, engaging.  Well-performed, gently-directed,
incisively written. (OK so I found some words.) I laughed a lot, I
nearly cried and in some parts I did both at the same time.
     Emma Thompson excels both in her role as Elinor and in the
adaptation of the  Jane Austen novel for the screen.  As Elinor she is
the embodiment of Sense, and she portrays perfectly the burden it puts
upon her.  There's one wonderful moment near the end of the movie where
she goes from standing and speaking, to collapsed and crying within a
heartbeat - you could almost hear the crack as the tensions built
within her snapped and crumbled.
     Kate Winslet is an utter delight.  She became a favorite of mine
in HEAVENLY CREATURES last year.  And she transfers her translucent
beauty and cunning acting skill perfectly to the role of Marianne.  She
too does a marvelous job of crying in parts.  But better still was the
way in which she demonstrated the growth of her character.  As each
development fell upon Marianne, she became a slightly different person
- and Kate portrays this wonderfully.
     Hugh Grant plays Edward Ferrars - a character outside of his
typical range.  Yet, he is still Hugh Grant, albeit slower - as if he
were dissolved into a highly viscous solution.  Take that as you will.
     Equal praise must go to the rest of the cast - e.g. the actors who
portrayed Col. Brandon, Willoughby and Mrs.  Jennings.  Every one of
them turned in a smashing performance and this would not have been half
the movie it is had they been lacking.
     Ang Lee has crafted a beautiful film full of entrancing colors -
azure, white, blush pink and deep mahogany.  I don't know what film
stock or lighting techniques he used, but the skin tones in this movie
are breathtaking.  He has filled accurate sets with beautiful costumes,
lavished with detail.  And his work with the cast speaks for itself.
     In comparing this to other movies ... it doesn't have the same
devastating emotional punch of HOWARDS END, but I think that may be
because it is more upbeat overall.  But it never gets 1/4 as sappy as
LITTLE WOMEN.  In fact, this movie is what LITTLE WOMEN should have
been.  And Hugh Grant fans might giggle to note that this movie depicts
or implies four weddings and one funeral.
--
Michael Doyle
maeldun@i-2000.com
To join "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews" send a message to listproc@vidkraft.com
with no subject and the words "subscribe m3review" in the body.

Title
Review for Jumanji (1995)
     It is a board game.  A board game with supernatural powers.  A
board game that carries a terrible curse.  Those who play it must
complete the game or never see an end to the jungle perils it unleashes
upon them.
     The movie, JUMANJI, starts on a rainy night in 1869 as a pair of
brothers bury a chest a mile outside of a small New Hampshire town.  As
they throw the dirt upon it, jungle drums beat from within the chest,
calling to them.  They persist, but when done, the younger asks the
older, "What if someone else unearths it and plays the game?" The elder
says, "Then may God have mercy upon his soul." [Lightning crash!]
     Flash forward to 1969, when Alan Parrish, a boy of eleven or so,
hears jungle drums at a construction site.  He uncovers the chest and
retrieves Jumanji.  The game is so beautiful - a case of carved wood
and with ivory pawn paths, animal-shaped tokens of carved onyx.  What
kid wouldn't want this game? (See note at end).  He brings it home and
shows it to his friend, Sarah.  They settle in to play the game and
when Alan rolls the dice, he is sucked into Jumanji.
     Flash forward once more to 1995, when Judy and Peter move into the
abandonned Parrish family home.  No sooner do they settle in than they
hear jungle drums coming from the attic.  No sooner do they investigate
the attic than they find themselves playing Jumanji.  The game
unleashes jungle terrors upon them, but it also sets free the vanished
Alan Parrish - who has grown up inside the game.  The three come to
realize the only way to end the madness Jumanji has wrought is to
finish the game that was started 26 years ago.  But that, of course,
means facing all the perils Jumanji has to offer head on.
     (This is a lot more exposition than I normally do, but I found the
trailer confusing when I first saw it and the commercials aren't much
better.  As far as you can tell from them, this movie concerns a wild
man, a board game and animals running amok.)
     JUMANJI is a demolition derby.  There is more smashing, crashing,
blasting, and crunching in this movie than in any I've seen this year.
The utter mayhem of JUMANJI makes SPEED look as if it were directed by
Felix Unger.
     Do you remember those moments in JURASSIC PARK when your mouth
just hung open and your eyes felt like they were coming out of their
sockets?  JUMANJI has a bunch of these (albeit not quite as many).  The
most magnificent was the stampede sequence.  I was prepared to be
unimpressed, but was completely blown away.  You could almost smell the
elephant droppings.
     The sound was critical in working this effect.  Industrial Light
and Magic did a great job spawning a jungle of digital creatures, but I
wasn't as impressed by the cyber-beasts as by the sound design.  If I
may indulge in Oscar speculation at such an early stage, I think
JUMANJI will nab this year's Academy Award for Sound Effects Editing.
     JUMANJI is not a character-driven movie.  There is a dab of
character development thrown in - enough to keep the story from being
flat as a board game.  It is not a movie for small children.  Take kids
six years old or under to JUMANJI and I guarantee they will want to
crawl into bed with mom & dad until they are 18.  There were some kids
in the audience at tonight's screening, and they seemed no worse for
wear, but they all seemed to be eight or older.
     JUMANJI is not an actor's movie, but there were no bad
performances.  Robin Williams plays the grown-up Alan.  Kirsten Dunst
(the vampirette of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) plays Judy.  Bebe
Neuwirth (Lilith from TV's "Cheers") is Judy and Peter's aunt.  David
Alan Greir (of TV's "In Living Color") plays a cop who's spends the
movie trying to get to the bottom of the weirdness.  And Bonnie Hunt
plays the grown-up Sarah.  Bonnie was the mother in the BEETHOVEN
movies and the best friend to Marisa Tomei's character in ONLY YOU.  I
like her - she's funny.
     JUMANJI draws a lot of laughs both from witty scripting and roller
coaster excitement.  But the emphasis is on the roller coaster.  This
movie is Busch Gardens, not the Comic Strip.
     If you are at all inclined toward seeing this kind of movie, see
it and see it on the big screen - preferably fifth row from the front
in a theatre with digital sound.  You'll have a blast.
Note:
     When I first saw the trailer for JUMANJI, I said to myself, "How
shameless! They're making a movie to promote a new board game.  I
wonder which will be greater, the box office receipts or the toy store
receipts."  But having seen the movie, I now wonder how they expect to
sell the board game?  What good is it if a kid rolls the dice and
nothing comes smashing through the walls?
--
Michael Doyle
maeldun@i-2000.com
To join "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews" send a message to listproc@vidkraft.com
with no subject and the words "subscribe m3review" in the body.

Title
Review for Heat (1995)
     PacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiroPacinoDeNiro.
     Who could fail to be awed?  What could be mightier than the coming
together of these two titanic forces of nature?  Was not the day we
heard these two would be paired in HEAT akin to the day we were told
Jack Nicholson was to play the Joker?  Pacino - the top cop; DeNiro the
chief thief.  What could we expect but a cinematic apocalypse of
galactic proportions?
     Michael Mann must have thought the same thing.  Michael Mann is
the director of HEAT.  He is also its screenwriter.  Michael Mann is
the creator of TV's Miami Vice and the director of several action
movies, including LAST OF THE MOHICANS.  Michael Mann must have said to
himself, "This is going to be my GOODFELLAS.  No.  This is going to be
my GODFATHER.  No this is going to be my GOODFELLAS *and* GODFATHER
rolled into one!"
     Let me begin by saying, Michael Mann is neither Martin Scorcese
nor Francis Ford Coppola.  But I knew that going in.
     The movie started off *fine*.  DeNiro and his crew (which includes
Val Kilmer) knock over an armored car - literally.  It's a brilliantly
hatched and well executed plan.  Pacino arrives on the scene and
catches the scent; the chase is on.  It was what I expected from Mann.
     But then, instead of focusing on the hunt and the heists, he
repeatedly returns to family life scenes concerning Pacino and Kilmer's
characters and an unlikely romance for DeNiro's.  A side plot develops
in which DeNiro's gang makes deals with the guy whose bonds they stole
from the armored car.  More characters are introduced and given
scenes.  Another side plot with a serial killer opens up.  As the
minutes piled up and the footage rolled on, a metronome began ticking
in my head, softly, "dull.....dull.....dull...."
     Don't get me wrong.  There's nothing wrong with a rich plot or
showing a character's family life.  But the bulk of the scenes and the
characters in them were so contrived and the editing so loose and
dragging, I couldn't understand why Mann didn't just stick to the core
story.
     Eventually, we come to the bank job.  The screen that had been
quiet almost since the opening, exploded with automatic weapons and
shotguns.  Glass shattered, cars crashed, people screamed.  It's a
great, climactic scene.  A climax you could go home from and say, "That
was a good movie."
     But it wasn't the climax!  It wasn't the end!  HEAT dragged on for
more than an hour afterwards.  I was writhing in my seat.  At one
point, a cop says, "I'm going to get some coffee and we're going to sit
until this thing is over with." I felt like saying, "Get some for me,
too."  As the credits finally rolled, someone behind me muttered, "That
was so long, DeNiro could have gone to prison in the first scene and
finished his sentence before the movie was over."
     The funny thing is that even though Pacino and DeNiro were the
leads in this movie, they shared only three, maybe four scenes.  One of
those scenes was dialogue; the rest were gunplay.  And in all of those
scenes, you never once see both Pacino's and DeNiro's faces on screen
at the same time.  It is entirely conceivable that these two men never
acted together in making this movie.
     I mentioned Val Kilmer as one of the supporting stars in HEAT.
The rest of the supporting cast seems like a list of every performer
ever mentioned on Film Flicks & Video Pix.  There's Tom Sizemore, John
Voigt, William Fichter, Wes Studi (Magua from LAST OF THE MOHICANS and
the title character in GERONIMO), Hank Azaria (of TV's "The Simpsons"),
Ashley Judd, even Henry Rollins and the guy who played the
knife-throwing hit man in DESPERADO.
     HEAT is two minutes of trailer material and 2 hours and 43 minutes
of filler.  It will be left to a future generation to harness the
combined power of Pacino and DeNiro and put it to constructive use for
humanity.
