Authors
Ann Tschirgi
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat (1995)
     This movie picked the right looking people for the roles.  But can
they act?  Well, sort of....  Kano does a solid job and so does Johnny
Cage and Lui Kang.  But Shang Tsung is not as menacing as you think and
Sub-Zero and Scorpion seem to serve the roles only to appear in fight
scenes.  Goro is a special effects reject with a ridiculous voice.
Kitana plays a bit role in the movie but she only offers advice to Lui
Kang.  Sonya Blade tries to be convincing as a woman who is
self-dependent but fails.  But Rayden does an excellent job with a
voice that matches perfectly.  Played by Christopher Lambert this is
the only thing I have seen him in that he does a good job.
     Everyone looks exactly how they do in the game.  Except for Goro
who looks like a tall bunch of green Silly Putty with a ponytail and a
funny face.  And Kitana looks different than in the game....  She looks
better!!  :).
     Shang Tsung holds tournaments against warriors from any planet.
These are the best warriors.  If they lose 10 times Shang Tsung takes
over their world.  Earth has lost 9 times.  This is the 10th time.
There are little sub plots like Sonya wanting revenge on Kano and Lui
Kang wanting to avenge the death of his brother.  But these are not
convincing and the main plot takes over the little ones.
     MORTAL KOMBAT has really great music.  From the stunning opening
piece to the last tune it has you captivated.  Its fits in right with
the fights.
     The sets in this movie were all computer-generated.  About a month
of work was put into places you see for seconds.  Rayden and Scorpion
have cool special effects.  The fight scenes are done well but there is
no blood!!  When someone gets punched 10 times there should be blood or
at least a bruise.
     If you like fight scenes or like the game see this movie!!  A
sequel is coming at some point.  So what do they need to improve?  Plot
and character development.
