Authors
Mike Harris
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Nobody's Fool (1994)
     This is a slice of life in small-town New York state where
everybody knows everybody so well that it pushes the boundaries of
normal social convention.  Paul Newman and Jessica Tandy give excellent
performances but there is a very strong supporting cast with very good
ensemble.  The plot is really secondary to the exposition of the
intricate and sometimes bizarre relationships between the characters
that stay just inside of being believable.  The plot, since I know you
want to know anyway, is focussed on Paul Newman's character, a man in
his sixties, who is just an ordinary guy in a sense.  He comes from a
family where his father regularly beat his wife and he learned to hate
him, he walked out on his wife when his son was a year old and his son
subsequently learned to hate him for abandoning them.  But things come
full circle as the son returns to town, his marriage in trouble and
learns the seeds of love for his father as he helps him through
troubled times.
     That sounds pretty heavy but it is not, quite the reverse, the
drama is never "laid on" but always light with a touch of humour.  The
humour in some instances erupted and made be laugh out loud and long,
one of the funniest being the court scene where the town is prosecuting
guess who for striking a police officer after the said police officer
had fired his pistol.  And if that doesn't pique your curiosity ...  how
can that be funny?
