Authors
Annie M Benson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
      This movie didn't feel like most other movies to me.  Although
it told a story, it wasn't a smooth narrative progression, rather it
was series of disconnected feeling moment that when put together gave
a glimpse into the life of the late Andy Kaufman.
   I wasn't a big Kaufman fan going into this film.  I'd seen him on
Taxi, and in a few other venues, but I didn't really know that much
about him.  While I now know more about the events of his life, I feel
that I don't know much about him personally.  Jim Carrey was on-screen
almost constantly, yet it seemed like there was only ten or fifteen
minutes of him playing Kaufman, not him playing Kaufman playing a
character.  This could be appropriate, the impression I was getting
was that Kaufman was almost engulfed b the characters he created.
      Kaufman's childhood and early career are almost entirely skipped
over.  There is a hint that he had to struggle at the beginning. but
basically the movie gives the impression that fame fell into his lap
overnight.  It seems like he got handed his role on "Taxi" despite his
hating it, and through very little effort of his own.
      This movie seems to raise a question.  Was Kaufman really a
jerk, or just really good at playing a jerk, almost constantly, for
comedic effect?  The film's answer is the later.  Yet, this answer
seems sugar-coated.  His relationship with the others in the cast of
"Taxi" seems strained as best, with him being shown as a bigger star,
but disdainful of his fellow cast and not willing to associate with
them except when the camera was rolling.  His relationship with his
family is equally strained.  When his doctor tells them of his
illness, they speculate on how Andy managed to pull off the joke.  I
left feeling that maybe both positions were true.
      No review about this movie would be complete without a few words
about Jim Carrey's performance.  Aside from eye and hair color, Carrey
and Kaufman don't look that much alike.
 Kaufman was shorter and stockier, Carrey more lanky and slender.  And
yet I didn't find myself noticing that too much as I watched.  Carrey
threw himself so effectively into the role that it's almost as if he
ceased to exist and Kaufman had come back from the grave.  As I
watched him recreate scenes from "Taxi" he was just as I remember
Kaufman being.  In fact, it was jarring watching the scenes being
played with original "Taxi" cast members, many of whom were showing
their age.  If it is an actor's job to make us believe the role he is
playing, the Carrey deserves an Oscar nomination.
      While this movie seems to paint a rosier picture of the man
behind this story than the facts may dictate, it does do justice to
enigma and creativity that was the Kaufman experience.
Remove "fakespam" from my email address to reply.
