Authors
Ekkehard Knoerer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Secret défense (1998)
Sécret Défense by Jacques Rivette (F 1998)
 Sylvie Roussel wakes up in the middle of the night, goes into the
kitchen, turns on  the hypermodern  faucet; she wants to drink a glass
of water, but she tests the  temperature, with her finger,  pours the
water back into the sink and waits until the  water is cold enough.
Sylvie Roussel is Elektra who has to take revenge for her father
Agamemnon, together with her brother Paul/Orestes and who gets deeper
and deeper  into an intricate story of death and disaster, love, trust,
and revenge. It is, varied only  in details, the story of Elektra and
Orest as told by the ancient tragedies.
The miracle which takes place in Rivette's films, which takes his films
as its place, is  always the same. He tells about young people (mostly
women) in today's France and  his films are full of the most subtle
observations about everyday life, about human  relationships - as in the
great tradition of French cinema, which lives on today in the  wonderful
films by Noemie Lvovsky or Erick Zonca or Yolande Zauberman. At the
same time, though, his characters and their fate are not of this world.
There is always a  second layer, right within the everyday experience,
which irritates the banal action, or  rather its banal reception, which
turns the most normal into something strangely  enigmatic. The point of
reference of  the stories, of which the audience becomes a  witness
rather than a spectator, is never any kind of realism or mimetism (the
same  thing is, though in a different way, true for Eric Rohmer's films)
- but on the other hand  it is also true that we, the witnesses, never
get the key to the mysteries. They never  add up to parable or allegory.
There lingers a suggestion of deeper meaning, but it  continually
withdrawas. In a lot of Rivette's films this mystery circles around a
never  completely explainable  conspiracies, sometimes perhaps mere
imagination of the  characters. Messages rather emerge than are sent
that seem to hint to a secret  connection of things (remember Balzac's
'Story of the Thirteen' in Rivette's most  experimental, 13 hour film
'Out 1 - Noli me tangere'). Such pure referentiality without  clear
reference, such a McGuffin that turns the most concrete everyday things
into  something mysterious is this time supplied by the tragedy of
Elektra. These  backgrounds are not simply a question of citation,
though, as one could think, trained  by postmodernism, or a kind of
structurization, which works exactly by the contrast of  everyday life
and reference to myth (take James Joyce's 'Ulysses'). The effect, in
Rivette, is enchantment. Enchantment that does not give promises and yet
lends  another dimension to things, persons, dialogues, events, a
dimension which to call  simply mythic would be another simplification.
And yet there is a relation to myth. This time around, the Elektra story
so obviously in  the background, it can not be ignored. Rivette does not
use myth, however, as a  means to the ends of his film, he does not use
myth to steal from the power of giving  meaning it may still possess
today. A lot of Hollywood movies do that (a rather  successful example:
The Truman Show and a stale one: Titanic, a film which Rivette  with
good reasons despises). Rivette rather empties myth, takes away all its
meaning,  its potential ways of meaning, and fills it again, detail by
detail, dialogue by dialogue,  move by move, enigmatic reference by
enigmatic reference - but without  reestablishing its old way of making
(deeper) sense. There is no other word for this  than (we have heard it
more than enough, but here it is in its right place:)  deconstruction.
It is the fascination and unprecedented adventure of Rivette's films
for the spectator to become the witness of this deconstruction of myths,
which is  completeley serious, not in the least ironic, which is modern
and not postmodern, and  which is, at the same time, full of suspense,
as cerebral as sensuous, to become a  witness with open eyes, open mind
and open heart.
copyright (1999) by Ekkehard Knoerer
