Authors
Ian Rooney
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
     THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a bad film that somehow got rave reviews.
>From the monotonous opening credits I knew I had been taken.
The film opens opens with about a five-minute nighttime shot of
shimmering black water, nothing else.  Nothing but the opening credits,
light shimmering on black water and ominous, melodramatic music.  I
recall thinking of how inexpensive it would be to go with five minutes
of black water and generic music that was probably recorded in the
1960's.  Having just paid $8 and change to enter, and then paid out for
popcorn that costed the equivalent of a full-course dinner at Swiss
Chalet, I grew a little impatient waiting for something to happen.
Unfortunately, something did happen.  A grimy little low-budget film
with lots of vulgarity and violence is what happened.  Not even Pulp-
Fiction level vulgarity and violence, either.  Boring cliche's, macho
stereotypes,  1970's-TV-Cop-Show familiarity with a lot of vulgar
language and grimy homo-eroticism thrown in to spice it up.  Cheap!
Cheap!  It screams cheap!  They must have found some old New-York hacks
to write and direct this piece of shit.  It is almost like they just
dusted off an old film from the seventies and released it.  What an
appalling.  PULP FICTION was gross and vulgar, yes, but at least whoever
made it had enough class to get away with it.  Whatever low-life made
THE USUAL SUSPECTS has no business playing with vulgarity and violence
because those are extra luxuries that a film like this simply cannot
afford.
     The low-lifes in the media who both enjoyed this film and gave it
a good review should have their heads checked so that they qualify for
disability when they are fired.  A lot of people will be disappointed
and ripped off by THE USUAL SUSPECTS.
