Authors
Doug Thomas
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crossing Guard, The (1995)
     Jack Nicholson gives a fantastic performance in an otherwise dull
film.  It's probably his best performance in 10 years, unfortunately,
Sean Penn's second film as a director is just missing ... something.
Have you ever watched a film and thought, "I can't put my finger on
what's wrong with this movie?"  That's exactly what will likely go
through your mind.  THE CROSSING GUARD is the story of Freddy Gale, a
man torn apart by rage and guilt since the death of his daughter by a
drunk driver several years previous.  Anjelica Houston plays his
ex-wife Mary, who fights with her former feelings of love for Freddy,
while finding his current behavior of drinking and slumming in topless
bars quite distasteful.  The film unfolds as John Booth (David Morse),
the man who killed Gale's daughter, is released from prison.  Freddy
vows that he will kill the man but when he is faced with the deed,
Booth pleads for a few more days to grieve and cpome to terms with his
crime.  Booth is not a thoughtless felon--he has grieved over his
prison time.  What probably should have been a poignant film quickly
turns routine as we follow Freddy on a series of drinking binges and
feel-sorry-for-myself tantrums.  Penn's skill as a director is uneven
at best, with far too many slow motion "artsy" scenes, several
unintentional funny moments and a completely un-realistic final.  It's
too bad that Penn didn't give the cast more to work with.  One of my
favorite actresses, Piper Laurie, is completely under-used, as Booth's
mother.  Also, MTV fans will find former "Remote Control" babe Kari
Wuhrer in a hilarious scene where she serenades Nicholson.
