Authors
Wayne V. Citrin
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Havana (1990)
     It's December 1958, and a gambler (Robert Redford) is on his way to
Havana to earn some money playing high-stakes poker, as he regularly
does.  On the boat, he does a favor for a beautiful woman (Lena Olin -
THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, ENEMIES, A LOVE STORY).  Their paths
cross again in  Havana, and Redford spends the rest of the film pursuing
both Olin and the big score.  But the Batista government is on its last
legs, the rebels are about to win, and the revolution ultimately upsets
Redford's plans for both Olin and the score.
     HAVANA starts off encouragingly, with a beautifully edited montage
of scenes designed to make Havana seem sensual, exciting, and dangerous.
This atmosphere is sustained for about an hour into the film, and then
the love story takes over and things fall flat.  Apart, Redford and Olin
are fine.  Redford (looking much older than I've ever seen him) is a
convincing man of the world, and Olin's performance has considerable
depth, giving the feeling that her character's political convictions are
genuine.  But when they get together, the chemistry isn't there.  This
is unfortunate, because it becomes obvious fairly early on that HAVANA
is a remake of CASABLANCA, with Redford and Olin in the Bogart and
Bergman roles.  In the scenes without Olin, Redford pulls this off
fairly well, but when he has to be tender with Olin it just seems lame
and out of character.  It's no spoiler to say that the film develops in
much the same way CASABLANCA does, although the price that Redford is
forced to pay at the end is much less than Bogart ultimately had to pay,
which I felt trivialized the ending.  The conclusion contains some
rather incoherent events relating to the CIA's involvement in Batista's
government, which I felt blunted the impact of the film (the
incoherence, that is, not the presence of the CIA itself).
     HAVANA does a very good job of presenting what the atmosphere and
feel of the city must have been like at that time, at least to a
visiting American.  There's not much discussion of how the city must
have seemed to poor Cubans and rebels, although that wasn't the point of
the film and could be excused.  The film does a good job of contrasting
the decadence of the city with the war in the countryside and the
brutality of the secret police that underlies everyday life.
     The film was shot in Santo Domingo, and the filmmakers were
impressively successful in reproducing the feeling of familiarity and
strangeness that Havana must have presented to Americans of the late
1950s.  Americans don't think much about Havana anymore; we're reminded
here that the city was a (long) ferry ride away, and that Americans once
considered the place not entirely foreign soil.
     The supporting cast is good.  Alan Arkin does an excellent job as
Redford's friend, a casino manager with no illusions about what's
coming.  (This is the Claude Rains part.)  The husband of the Olin
character, played by Raul Julia in an uncredited role (due to a dispute
over the billing to which Julia was entitled) is good in the Paul
Henried part, and the actor who plays the chief of police (whose name I
didn't catch) is also good.
     In short, the film is not bad, but it's no CASABLANCA (although
there's no shame in that).  It needed a more convincing love story, and
the ending should have both hurt more and been more exhilarating, in
the manner of CASABLANCA.
