Authors
Michael Brooke
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Careful (1992)
Directed by Guy Maddin.
Written by George Toles and Guy Maddin.
Canada, 1992, colour, 100 mins.
Starring Kyle McCulloch, Gosia Dobrowolska, Paul Cox.
     There are few film-makers whose work is instantly recognisable
from a five-second clip taken out of context, but Canadian director Guy
Maddin joined this select group with his very first feature, the
black-and-white silent film TALES FROM THE GIMLI HOSPITAL (1988), a
series of shaggy-dog stories told by hospital patients suffering from a
strange disease that causes their skin to crack.  ARCHANGEL (1990) was
more ambitious, an epic set in the trenches of World War I, still in
black-and-white, but this time with a post-synchronised soundtrack.
     On the surface, CAREFUL (1992) is a tribute to German "mountain
films" of the late 1920s.  Future director Leni Riefenstahl started her
career as an actress specialising in this genre (Hitler was a fan), in
which strapping young lads and lasses go up Alpine peaks for thrilling
adventures.  Despite the surface pastiche (including a deliberately
crackly soundtrack and colour that looks like hand-tinted monochrome),
Maddin's film couldn't be more different from its sources.  The opening
narration sets the scene: the people of the Alpine village of Tolzbad
show obsessive caution at all times, lest a sudden noise or movement
cause avalanches to come and destroy them.
     Needless to say, this repressed environment is a natural breeding
ground for secret passions and obsessions.  Johan neglects his studies
at the famous Tolzbad Butler Gymnasium (Tolzbad's stifled atmosphere
lends itself to servility) because of his incestuous obsession with his
mother Zenaida.  His fiancee Klara is similarly infatuated with her
father, but he spurns her because of his lust for her sister
Sieglinde.  And Zenaida has a long-standing relationship with the
mysterious Count Knotkers, who lives in the remote castle in the
mountains, and who hires Grigorss, Johan's brother, as a butler.
Watching over all this is Franz, the cobwebbed older brother of Johan
and Grigorss, shut up in the attic because of the painful memories he
evokes.  And he is in turn regularly visited by the ghost of his
father, a blind swan-feeder, who gives him premonitions of terrible
things.  But Franz is both mute and possibly insane, so the ghostly
warnings go unheeded--and this melodramatic stew predictably leads to
misunderstandings, duels and suicidal plunges galore.
     What is fascinating about CAREFUL is the way that director (and
co-writer, cinematographer, editor and designer) Maddin shows the same
degree of obsession behind the camera that his characters show in front
of it.  Directors who love old films so much they want to imitate them
are nothing new, but Maddin loves them so much he wants his films to
look like old prints of old films (where most films deteriorate through
repeated projection, CAREFUL improves!)--which is, after all, how
Maddin (currently in his thirties) would have seen German mountain
films in the first place.  It's more than pastiche--you get the
impression that Maddin genuinely believes that this is how films should
be made, and that cinema hasn't really developed since the late 1920s.
     He has a point--1920s directors like Abel Gance (NAPOLEON, LA
ROUE) often showed a far greater visual sophistication than most of the
film-makers who followed him, and none of Fritz Lang's American films
ever recaptured the grandiose excesses of his German epics (DESTINY,
SIEGFRIED, METROPOLIS).  And although others have picked up on the
artificial Expressionism pioneered by the makers of THE CABINET OF
DR.CALIGARI, few before Maddin have embraced the techniques so
wholeheartedly.
     It's almost impossible to imagine him following compatriots David
Cronenberg and Atom Egoyan into the mainstream, as his work is so
strange it makes the average David Lynch film look like 'Baywatch'.
But one hopes that his enlightened backers will continue to fund his
bizarre visions.  CAREFUL is a giant step forward for Maddin in that
it's very accessible and enormously entertaining (the earlier work was
often too self-consciously precious, and the budgets painfully low).  I
for one shall treasure moments like the giant blue Alpenhorns
serenading the summer, or Zenaida's instructions to "lower the
sheepskins" in order to provide adequate soundproofing before dancing
to scratchy violins, or Johan's scrupulous closing of the gate behind
him before his fatal plunge, or Grigorss dripping candle-wax onto the
face of the dead Countess Knotkers and trying to repair the damage -
plus Maddin's frequent mock-Gothic intertitles solemnly announcing
"Such is the moonrise in Tolzbad" after one of Franz' father's ghostly
visitations.  If Hollywood's recent output is just too brain-numbingly
repetitive, give Maddin's films a try--at least you can guarantee that
there's no-one else out there quite like him.

Title
Review for Baby of Macon, The (1993)
Written and directed by Peter Greenaway.
UK/Netherlands/France/Germany, 1993, colour, 122 mins.
Starring Julia Ormond, Ralph Fiennes, Jonathan Lacey.
     After a pre-release screening of Peter Greenaway's THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, the audience (mostly critics and
exhibitors) were split down the middle.  Some loved it, others thought
he'd gone much too far and was looking at a major critical and
commercial disaster ("it's Greenaway's 1941", was a phrase I recall).
Well, as hindsight reveals, COOK THIEF was Greenaway's biggest hit
ever, and the film that finally cemented his reputation on the other
side of the Atlantic (helped no doubt by the row over its X rating),
and critical opinion was, in the main, favourable.
     Well, with THE BABY OF MACON, he really does go too far, and the
result is one of the most gratuitously unpleasant and indefensibly
nasty films of recent years.  Although Greenaway has argued that the
violence in THE BABY OF MACON is more than justified by the amount of
allegorical interpretations that it throws up (he's even cited the
current Bosnian tragedy as inspiration), the film itself doesn't stand
up to such scrutiny for a moment, because of Greenaway's perverse
determination to make the process of watching the film as much of an
ordeal as possible, right from the stuttering plague victim who
supplies the scene-setting narration.  When he's not treating us to
murder, multiple rape and child dismemberment, he's numbing our brains
with boredom over the ritualised style that for some reason demands
that the majority of the lines in the play-within-the-film are repeated
three times (apparently the screenplay was originally intended as an
opera libretto, which is easy to believe--imagine how tedious the
average opera libretto would be if read out in incantatory tones
without the music to underpin it).
     COOK THIEF was often equally nasty, but it kept us riveted to the
screen, by virtue of the superb performances of Michael Gambon, Helen
Mirren and Alan Howard.  Despite a cast that includes Ralph Fiennes and
Julia Ormond (both do full-frontal nude scenes, if anyone's interested
--given that Fiennes is graphically disembowelled shortly afterwards I
don't recommend the film as an erotic diversion), the rigid stylisation
of THE BABY OF MACON saps their performances of any energy they might
have had under a different director.  The dialogue, blending the blank
verse of the play with Greenaway's attempt at cod-sixteenth-century
speech, is excruciatingly awful--he's always had a tin ear for the
English language, and this time round he's deprived of Michael Nyman's
music (the music he used could have come from any baroque CD
compilation chosen at random, for all the effect they have).
     The film is, as usual with Greenaway, crammed to bursting with
ideas and extra-cinematic references.  There are nods to the barbarity
and corruption under the aristocratic surface of the Medici clan, there
are debates on religion and its attitude towards the miraculous, and
there's a full-scale exploration of the age-old theme of illusion
versus reality, as the miracle play 'The Baby of Macon' is performed
before the Medici court, and the events depicted gradually spill over
into real life, culminating in the scene where an actress (Ormond), is
actually raped 217 times by her fellow actors (the number is, as with
everything in Greenaway, meant to signify something or other).
     But despite the fact that this agonisingly protracted gang rape is
almost immediately followed by the graphic dismemberment of the baby of
the title, by this stage much of the audience is too comatose with
boredom to care--one can neither get a kick out of it or be shocked by
it, and that's the most shocking thing about the film.  There's no
centre to give it focus, no Prospero, no Thief.  It's two hours of
elaborate costumes, scenery and philosophical ideas in desperate search
of a reason for their existence.
     As always with Greenaway, design and cinematography (Ben Van Os,
Jan Roelfs, Sacha Vierny) are stunning--especially considering the
relatively low budget.  But then they usually are with these
collaborators, and the cast is perfectly adequate considering the
script they had to put up with.  It's a powerful example of auteurism
gone mad, of a film-maker so convinced that what he is doing is
absolutely right that he removes everything that audiences might be
interested in (characters we care about, stories worth following) in
the assumption that the power of his vision is enough to keep our eyes
riveted to the screen.  Well it isn't--and one hopes the colossal
commercial failure of THE BABY OF MACON helps get the message across.

Title
Review for Faust (1994)
Written and directed by Jan Svankmajer
UK/France/Germany/Czech Republic, 1994, 97 mins
Starring Petr Cepek, Jan Kraus, Vladimir Kudla
     A welcome corrective to the stiflingly literal brand of literary
transcription peddled by Merchant-Ivory et al--with FAUST, the Czech
animator Jan Svankmajer takes basic ideas from the plays of Christopher
Marlowe and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, an obscure novel by the
now-forgotten Christian Dietrich Grabbe, Charles Gounod's opera, and
old Czech puppet versions of the oft-adapted legend of the man who sold
his soul to the devil, and filters them through his own imagination,
which, as anyone who's seen even one of his earlier films will know, is
one of the most wildly inventive in Europe.  He tried a similar approach
to Lewis Carroll's work in ALICE (1988), which although intermittently
brilliant looked more like a collection of short films (the medium for
which Svankmajer is best known) than a coherent feature.  FAUST is far
more successful, blending live action with Svankmajer's trademark
claymation and the giant puppets he previously used in the mini-feature
DON SAJN (1970) to unnervingly dislocated effect.
     The unexplained shifts in style perfectly suit Svankmajer's
approach to the text, which only vaguely touches on the subtleties and
depths of the Marlowe and Goethe versions--but this isn't an attempt to
provide an alternative to Goethe, it's more of a late twentieth century
response to the theme.  And although uncredited, Franz Kafka and
Mikhail Bulgakov (THE MASTER AND MARGARITA) and indeed Lewis Carroll
lurk somewhere in the background (Faust's servant seems to change size
relative to Faust in almost every scene the two are in, and the opening
in which Faust enters a mysterious corridor off a side street is
straight out of the opening of ALICE IN WONDERLAND).
     Where Svankmajer's version differs radically from other
presentations of the Faust story is that Faust himself (or rather the
unnamed character representing him) is almost entirely passive.  He is
lured off the streets of Prague by two men handing out a mysterious
map, and ends up in an old theatre performing in a nightmarish puppet
version of FAUST (there are shades of Luis Bunuel's THE DISCREET CHARM
OF THE BOURGEOISIE in his realisation that an audience is watching and
he doesn't know his lines).  Wherever he goes, he is watched, either by
the two men at the beginning (who subsequently turn up to perform
miracles in a garden cafe), or by the theatre staff, or by
Mephistopheles, whom Faust summons because it seems like the logical
thing to do (and it's in the script).  Although Svankmajer never claims
that this is an explicit allegory of life in pre-Vaclav Havel Prague,
it's highly unlikely that he was unaware of the comparisons.  And this
whole theme of Manipulation From Above (or indeed Below) reaches its
climax in the final scene, a gloriously sick plot twist that both makes
perfect sense in context and provides an impeccably neat circular
finale to the film.
     The dialogue is in blank verse, with all the voices in the English
version provided by Andrew Sachs (best known as Manuel in "Fawlty
Towers," though you'd never guess from the range of voices on
display).  It sounds as though much of the text originates from Marlowe
(though it would be interesting to compare this with the German
version), though as the film is far more driven by its virtuoso visuals
this is largely irrelevant.  And these are frequently stunning--a pool
of nameless slime forms itself into a rapidly-aging baby, hordes of
tiny angels and devils do battle for Faust's soul, apples wither into
maggot-ridden husks at the devil's passing, while an old tramp carries
a badly-wrapped package that might just contain a severed leg--and
Svankmajer throws in plenty of knockabout comedy to emphasise the
story's theatrical origins: a fiery chariot from Hell causes problems
for the theatre's fire safety officer, a devil is repeatedly summoned
and banished by Faust's Punch-like servant until he collapses with
exhaustion (running to and from the theatre past
surprised-looking--genuinely unprepared?--Prague passers-by), while a
Gounod-scored opera/ballet interlude with ballerinas raking fields
beautifully parodies the socialist realism that the old Czech
government was so fond of.
     Above all, FAUST demonstrates just how the seemingly catch-all
adjective "surreal" has been so debased since its introduction 70-odd
years ago by virtue of its being used to describe anything even vaguely
unusual.  As one would expect from a 25-year member of the Prague
Surrealist Group, FAUST is a Surrealist film, and as such manages a
more effective attempt at capturing dream-logic than almost any film
since Bunuel passed away.  It isn't for everyone--even some Svankmajer
fans have expressed disappointment with it, presumably because it isn't
animated throughout, or they have a problem with the puppets (this is
because Czech culture recognises puppets as a serious art form, while
in most Western countries they're strictly for children)--but anyone
who approaches it with a genuinely open mind should lap it up.  It's
Svankmajer's longest, most inventive and quite possibly weirdest film
to date.
