Authors
Michelle Dean
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
     I wasn't really expecting much when I went to see this film on
opening night.  I too had read all the articles about this expensive
epic, about all Kevin Costner's problems with it.  I was expecting one
expansive, expensive mess of a movie.  However, surprisingly enough, I
enjoyed it.
     The premise is this: The inhabitants of Waterworld, which is
really a flooded Earth due to melted polar ice caps, are in constant
search for that mythical place they call Dryland.  There are two
"peoples" in Waterworld; the Smokers and the Something-elses (I just
can't remember the name, they only said it once, if at all).  Markings
on a young Something-else girl named Enola's (Tina Majorino) back have
been rumoured to show the way to Dryland, and so the Smokers head off
to raid her "village."  She and her friend, Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn)
escape the battle with the mysterious Mariner (Kevin Costner), a mutant
man who has gills and webbed feet, who says he'll take them to
Dryland.  Upon learning of Enola's escape the Smokers, led by the
Deacon (Dennis Hopper), set off in pursuit of the trio.  Complicated
enough?
     You really have to suspend most of your knowledge to bring this
film anywhere close to believable, of course, but it has its moments.
The biggest problem with the film is the fact that it spend little or
no time explaining what it's doing and why.  We haven't a clue why the
Smokers are pitted against the Something-elses.  We just don't like
them because it doesn't seem like we're really supposed to, although
the Something-elses don't appear to be any better than their neighbours
in the first hour of the film.  We don't really get to know any of the
characters at all.  Granted, it wasn't meant to be any sort of thinking
film but I would have liked to know what was going on at times.  There
are also way too many characters in the film, many of them too
incidental to even remember their names.  It was tough keeping track of
the names of the four main players.  But somehow it manages to all tie
together and be completely watchable.
     The action scenes, which are numerous, do send adrenaline shooting
through your body.  However, they do tend to be confusing, and you
don't always understand what it is that the Mariner's doing until the
result makes it obvious.  There are a lot of explosions and fire and
the special effects waver between spectacular in the scenes on the
tank, and, in a few scenes where the characters are flying in a hot-air
balloon, mediocre.
     The performances are about as dependable as the special effects.
I love Tina Majorino (CORRINA, CORRINA; WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN), and
always have, and she's just as good here.  She isn't really given much
to do but she works well with what she is given and I heard more than
one person walk out of the theatre saying "I love that little girl!"
Kevin Costner (FIELD OF DREAMS, DANCES WITH WOLVES) actually manages to
bring some feeling into that flat dumb-jock speech of his and give a
solid, if not spectacular, performance.  Jeanne Tripplehorn is an
actress I hadn't seen before and will only see again if she's
headlining with someone I do like, because she was perfectly
unremarkable.  Dennis Hopper is horrible.  He spends his whole time
swaggering about and yelling.  He needs to be taught that just because
you yell a line doesn't make it believable.
