Authors
SwpStke@aol.com
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dinosaur (2000)
Dinosaur is beyond belief in so many ways. The computer animation is 
astonishing, and it will blow you away. Never before has any film combined 
live action backgrounds with computer generated characters so seamlessly. 
Shots where real waterfalls with cascading water blend with images of 
dinosaurs of all species create a truly unique experience. It really makes a 
difference to how real you might think it is. The animal's characteristics 
may be very human-like, but they are always beautiful and interesting. There 
are so many little details that get closely examined. The ways a lemur's fur 
might ruffle, the texture of a triceratops's skin, and even more trivial 
animal elements get handled with the greatest of care. With so much attention 
to these small particulars, it's amazing one major part of the movie gets 
entirely overlooked. This gorgeous movie has one derivative and horrendous 
script. 
Like the latest Aardman Animations production Chicken Run, Dinosaur borrows 
heavily from other animated films. Aladar is a dinosaur whose egg gets 
dropped off with a bunch of lemurs before he is even born. After some 
discussion between the heads of the lemur group, the animals decide to adopt 
the dinosaur and raise him as their own. As Aladar grows up, he longs for 
others of his species to be with. It appears as if writers John Harrison and 
Robert Nelson Jacobs copied and pasted the first part of this movie from the 
script of last year's Disney film Tarzan. A devastating meteor shower forces 
the lemurs and Aladar off their small island. On the mainland they meet up 
with a herd of dinosaurs of several species. Aladar finally realizes he's not 
alone. He soon falls in love with Neera, a female dinosaur whose brother Kron 
is the head of the group. Kron favors himself and the other stronger animals. 
He believes that only the strong should survive and hopes to rid himself and 
others of the weak animals that Aladar tries to help. This of course sounds 
just like the influence of Gene Hackman's General Mandible who had a similar 
plan in the 1998 film Antz. The group must travel under harsh conditions to 
reach the glorious mating grounds, a lush place for dinosaurs. The Land 
Before Time did the same thing. A Jurassic Park aura is also present.
The problem with Dinosaur is its level of implausibility. Not only do the 
dinosaurs and lemurs look spectacular, they talk too. There is a good mix of 
dinosaur roaring and talking in English. This is obviously there for more 
appeal, but I seriously doubt that before anyone on the earth was born we had 
lemurs using terms like, "raging epidemic." One rather humorous alternative 
to the dinosaurs talking and roaring would be to have them roar, and only 
roar. Their roars could then get translated into subtitles that would appear 
on the bottom of the screen. However, subtitles aren't exactly kid-friendly 
and stars like Alfre Woodard and Ossie Davis couldn't get listed as voices. 
The lack of needed humor was also rather shocking. If the dinosaurs are going 
to talk, at least give them some good lines. Instead, we get humor like Neera 
referring to Aladar as a âjerkasaurusâ? when they first meet. This movie got 
rated PG for intense images and is likely to frighten young children. There 
are some very scary and tense scenes (even a few that had me jumping out of 
my seat) that might send the little ones into crying hysteria. Not being of 
the tyke type, I found these sequences to be thrilling. The older viewers 
finally get treated to something heart-pounding that moves things along. 
There is a string of action moments where the animation and score really 
shine through.
The formulaic story does have a few bright moments, but it's mostly the 
standard child's movie fare. Looking back at the kid's animation genre, this 
formula gets used again and again, and is quite tired. Any change to the 
strict policy these films adhere to would be welcome. At this time we get 
left with Dinosaur, which is worth seeing for its visuals, but not its 
content.
