Authors
Tristan H E White
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Laberinto de pasiones (1982)
     This crazy story (Almodovar's 3rd feature-length movie) revolves
around four central characters: Riza Niro (Imanol "Intruder" Arias),
who is the son of the Emperor of Tiran, Sadec (a very young Antonio
"MAMBO KINGS/PHILADELPHIA" Banderas), the gay Islamic terrorist with
an amazing sense of smell, Sexilia (Celia Roth), the stunning singer
and nymphomaniac who is afraid of the sunlight, and Queti (Marta
Fernandez-Muro), the dry-cleaner's daughter, fan of Sexilia's and whose
father (Luis Ciges) rapes her, believing her to be his own estranged
wife.
     While hiding from the terrorists, Riza joins a punk band, and a
rapport develops between himself and Sexilia.  Throughout the film,
Sexilia works out in flashbacks how she became a nymphomaniac, afraid
of the sun, and how Riza discovered homosexuality.
     To really enjoy this film it seems almost essential to be a heavy
Almodovar fan.  Common themes (homosexuality, nymphomania, incest, hard
drugs, rock'n'roll, Madrid life) abound, here stronger than ever.  It
is a hard film to translate adequately into another language because of
the slang and humour of the Madrid "pasotas".  The script is fast,
lively and sparkling; the acting is both over-the-top and natural.  The
scenes of Madrid are as colourful as ever.
     Much of the script seems to be ad-lib, as if a hidden camera were
filming everything.  One of the best scenes is a photo-shoot with Fabio
(Fany McNamara) posing with a drill.  The ensuing conversation between
Fabio and Riza Niro must be one of the most memorable dialogues in
Almodovarian films.
     One interesting point concerning the acting is that neither the
terrorists nor Riza Niro make any attempt to feign a `foreign' accent,
and keep their pasota-ness throughout.  This is intentional, and used
for effect later on when Eusebio (Angel Alcazar) and his girlfriend
(Cristina S. Pascual) comment on this.  On the other hand, Helga Line
over-acts her role as Princess Toraya, adding to the delightful naivete
of the admirable casting.
     One of the jewels of the film is the evocative punk soundtrack.
In a club, Pedro Almodovar himself gets up on stage when the announced
band, "ELLOS", are late arriving.  He and Fabio (his then real-life gay
lover) sing a superbly kitch punk rock song, "Suck It To Me", written
by Almodovar himself.  Later on, when the transformed Riza Niro sings
"Gran Ganga", having been asked to sing because the original singer,
Eusebio, has broken his leg after Sexilia had made him slip down the
stairs on a banana skin, the crowd go wild with admiration.  Both "Gran
Ganga" (another song from the Almodovar-McNamara discography) and "Suck
It To Me" have become timeless classics in Spain among the punk-rock
followers.
     LABYRINTH OF PASSION is not a family film, but one for an
open-minded Almodovar follower.  There are many adult themes, though
nothing is depicted explicitly.  It is indeed a film to watch a hundred
times and never tire of. 10 out of 10.

Title
Review for Shopping (1994)
     When I read on some poster somewhere that SHOPPING was "The
CLOCKWORK ORANGE of the Nineties" I thought that this was a rather naff
cliche and doubted that the film would live up to this statement.  I
was not expecting to see such an explosive and awesome film.
     The cinema was packed.  There were all sorts of people in the
queue outside the Prince Charles in Leicester Square, London.  Mainly
early to mid-twenties, but there was a large contingent of people
representing a slightly older age-block.
     The film started off with a powerful techno-beat, which continued
throughout, from progressive house to bakalao, etc.  Jude Law plays
Billy, just released from three months in the nick.  Sadie Frost plays
his Irish girlfriend, Jo.  Both experience a buzz from stealing cars,
joyriding and ramming cars into shop windows or "ram-raiding."  They
are not big-time thieves, they do it merely for their own
satisfaction.
     The film must have shocked some of the parents seated in the
auditorium, seeing ram-raiding portrayed so candidly and disturbingly.
The director, in an interview, said that the movie was meant to make
people (especially those who were unfamiliar with the issue) know what
ram-raiding is all about, why people do it.  It certainly explains why,
though it never justifies their actions.
     The film is certainly one for one-liners and memorable quotes.
Some of the language, however, was too much for some of the audience,
and when a policeman gets a full whack in the face with a baseball bat
there was a shuffling of feet as some of the audience left.  The film
never promotes violence, but it does explain why violence occurs.  Had
these people stayed until the end of the film they would have seen a
masterpiece.
     For Jo and Billy, life is a game, like the "Krazy Kars" hand-held
console-game that Jo plays with constantly throughout the movie.
Always taking only the best cars (25000 BMWs, Porsches, etc) they
attract the attention of the police (the "fashion patrol") so as to
encourage a chase "for fun."  They steal nothing, except the odd pair
of sunglasses or a kettle.  Sean Pertwee, meanwhile, (Tommy, the "bad
guy") is the leader of the rival gang.  He does the same but for
money.  His crowd ram-raids shops for the expensive clothes, they steal
cars in exchange for 15 pounds and a bag of Ecstasy.  Hatred begins to
instill between Tommy and Billy; each one wants to show the other who is
the greater "hero."
     This seems like a society without values, of complete anarchy and
hatred.  However, this is not so.  They have their own values.  When
Billy offers Jo and Be-Bop a coffee, Be-Bop replies "That stuff is bad
for you, Billy."  When Billy sees what Jo is smoking, he retorts
"Camel!  You can die from that."  Later, when Billy refuses to show
affection towards Jo, he replies "This is the 90s.  Sex isn't safe any
more."  For them, ram-raiding cars into shop windows and being chased by
the police is not "bad," and safer than sex.  This type of excitement
is Billy's alternative to sex and drugs.  For Billy, the moment of
crashing into a shop window seems orgasmic.  When he stands in the
middle of the motorway tempting death he refers to it as like "the
first time you take a drug."  Billy doesn't want to leave the place he
calls home and wants "one last hit" at ram-raiding, though he has no
home to go to after his pad is vandalized and his father no longer
wants to know him.
     This film is a must for fans of car chases, as there are dozens of
them.  With an open mind no one could really fail to find the film
gripping or moving.  On the other hand, one cannot fail to find it
extremely disturbing, unless one is oneself disturbed.  The crowd
coming out of the cinema seemed to have become much younger than the
one that had gone inside at the start, and I saw no one, from among
those who left, under the age of 35.  However, I feel that those who
were too easily affected by the swearing and the content missed out on
a lot.  It is wrong to discard a film, as some of the "quality"
newspapers have done, because of the language and/or violence.  Indeed,
SHOPPING has four times as many f.p.m. ("fucks"-per-minute) as
GOODFELLAS.  But the storyline is too close to home for some of the
audience.
     This film, under Michael Howard M.P.'s recent ban of video-release
in the UK for excessively violent movies, may never make it to the
shelves (legally).  While I deplore the fate this ruling has implied
for movies such as RESERVOIR DOGS, I am glad that this film will not
be available in everyone's sitting room.  It is not a film that
someone's 10 year old should be able to get his hands on, as it could
certainly screw him up.  Moreover, by making SHOPPING only available
on the big screen assures its survival, as it will continue to be shown
at Art-House cinemas throughout the country.  Furthermore, it is really
a film to see on the big screen to get the feeling of the horror and
ultraviolence.  It is also entertaining to study the reaction of the
rest of the audience during the nasty bits.  Oh, but get a good Dolby
Stereo theatre, the sound is used to great effect, particularly the
music and the helicopter ("Pigs in Space") scenes.
     What really kept amazing me throughout the movie was that this was
a really powerful violent *British* movie.  Tony Imi's photography is
so crisp, the chase scenes are so well done and explosive, it seems
like a top-budget Hollywood movie.  The movie, however, was made on a
very tight budget.  It is so refreshing to see new faces and a new
genre in British film-making.  If this film were screened in the USA
(and I hope it will be), it would take the American public by a storm
and would certainly show their movie-going audience that the British
are capable of making films other than period dramas and sloppy-slushy
farces.  When I was watching a scene being filmed in Whitechapel (just
off Vallance Road, London) I asked one of the crew working on it about
the movie.  He told me that "It will be called Ram-Raiders and will be
an American-Style action movie."  He was a little off with the eventual
choice of title, but I can very much see why this is "American-Style,"
though at the same time it is a London-style pastiche (but a successful
one) of the old American concept of the cops-and-robbers movies.
     I wonder whether Paul has achieved his aim to make a film to bring
across the issue of ram-raiding and joyriding to everybody.  He may
have misjudged some of his audience, as the very people that needed to
understand this issue left before half the film had run.  Everyone who
saw the film right to the end (a good 400 of us) was saying "What a
brilliant film."  I, for one, could not see another film for a good
number of days afterwards.
     I see now why it was called "The CLOCKWORK ORANGE of the
Nineties," though SHOPPING does not try to emulate the film in any
way.  What I originally thought to be a rather cliched statement rings
quite true.  While not being one for cliches myself, I can say that
this film is pure Adrenalin, a powerhouse of a movie, awesome, and...
if you only see one film in 1994, MAKE SURE IT'S SHOPPING !!!  10 out
of 10.
     Next time your car gets done over, and you ask yourself "Why?" in
bitter exasperation, watch "Shopping" and you'll know.
