Authors
Ann Alvarez
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Pariah (1998)
Pariah is an explosive realistic look at the world of "Skinheads". As a
hispanic female, to watch the hatred portrayed against all races not
white,and abuse towards women in general. It is a slap in the face of
the realism that exists in the world today. The cast is absolutely
riveting and convincing in their portrayal. Damon Jones and Dave Owen
Ward stand out in their portrayal of skinhead and avenger. Jones, starts
out as a decent guy,whom happens to be involved in an interracial
relationship. At the wrong place at the wrong time, a group of skinheads
masterminded by Ward,rape and beat Jones girlfriend as he helplessly is
forced to watch.  She then commits suicide, which triggers Jones to take
a twisted turn of events, as he now is seeking vindication  for what has
become of his life. He becomes one of them (skinhead) after much
resistance from them. Aimee Chaffin(Sissy) brings a raw look into todays
street youth, that is hard on the outside,yet soft in the inside. And
you, as a viewer,can see through. Brandon Slater also delivers a
realistic look into an autistic youth who happens to be involved in the
world of skinheads, because of his sister, Sissy. Slater(Doughboy) is
the most endearing of all portrayed. How this all ends, will leave you
thinking about the world we live in and the society we've bred. This is
not a movie for the faint hearted or people whom simply choose to look
the other way and ignore the realisms of life. Randolph Kret has
directed a winner in my eyes. BRAVO!
ANN ALVAREZ                                              VENICE CA.
