Authors
Nemanja Dundjerovic
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Cutthroat Island (1995)
     CUTTHROAT ISLAND is most likely the last movie producer Mario
Kassar of Carolco will do in a while, but it seems that Mr.Kassar
decided to go out in a blaze of glory.  CUTTHROAT ISLAND, starring
Geena Davis, Matthew Modine, Maury Chaykin and Frank Langella, directed
by Finnish Adonis-Director Renny Harlin is definitely a feast for the
eyes.  The plot (there was actually something resembling a plot!!!)
revolves around a buried treasure on Cutthroat Island.  Pirate Morgan
Adams (Davis) and her evil uncle Dawg (Langella)are simultaneously
chasing after it. Davis recruits Modine to read a map in Latin and some
silly romance is squeezed out of this.  The film's climax occurs when,
after 90 minutes worth of restless adventure, Morgan's ship and Dawg's
ship clash in the middle of the ocean. Needless to say, Morgan wins.
     Renny Harlin seems talented enough to realize that the script had
no potential except lavish chase, battle and fight scenes in 17-century
Jamaica.  So, he devotes most of the movie's $75 million budget to some
exceptionally engaging scenes.  The ultimate good vs.  evil clash at
the end of the movie lasts a good 25 minutes, and it is exceptionally
spectacular.  The movie is a roller-coaster from start to finish, and
Davis keeps coming across being too quick-witted for this lame part
(she does get to beat up a lot of guys AND blow Langella out of the sky
with a cannon at point-blank range).  The music in CUTTHROAT ISLAND is
spectacular (I'm running out of adjectives here) and it is used
effectively by Harlin to make most of the spectators deaf.  Overall,
CUTTHROAT ISLAND was full of quick pleasures, but the glossy coating is
very thin.  A question:  Why were there only two other people other
than my friend and me in the theater?  Did they not advertise the
movie?
