Authors
Thomas A. Miller
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Army of Darkness (1993)
     I don't usually do these, so I don't have a standard format or
anything, but here are my thoughts on this film.  You'll note that I
don't have most of the actors' and actresses' names or anything like
that...
     ARMY OF DARKNESS is basically a sequel to EVIL DEAD and EVIL DEAD
II: DEAD BY DAWN.  Though I've only seen bits and pieces of those
other two movies, I noted the similarities between them and this one.
Directed by Sam Raimi (EVIL DEAD, EVIL DEAD II, DARKMAN), this movie
details the adventures (and misadventures) of Ash (Bruce Campbell) after
he gets thrown back into medieval times.
     In a nutshell:  It was hilarious.  I haven't laughed so hard in a
long, long time.  As a combination horror/comedy, this film works very
well.  It's like a "Bill & Ted" or "Wayne's World" movie, with much more
violence, and infinitely better special effects.
     Plot nutshell:  Ash tries to get back to his own time by finding
the Necronomicon and saying three words of power.  His inability to
speak the words results in an army of undead being raised, and he must
help the nearby people cope.
     Effects:  The walking skeletons were nicely done, as were the
close- ups of the various dead people/monsters.
     Humor:  Out of this world.  If you see this with a loud audience,
you'll miss some of the undeads' best lines (my audience shut up for the
most part, especially when Ash was talking.)  Also some of the things
that happen to the undead (and to the living) are really funny, if you
like this sort of movie.
     Overall:  I recommend it at full prices, and I'm not even a Raimi
fan.  I only went to see it because the previews looked good.  It's
perhaps even worth seeing twice.
     Disclaimer:  I don't do "real" reviews.  If you found this one to
be tolerable, thanks for bearing with me.
