Authors
Raul Cairo 
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
     Disney has done it again.  After thirty animated feature films, it
is still surprising that Disney can still surpass themselves.  I
remember walking out of the theatre and staying in awe of the animation
that I saw.  It may be to early to say, but this movie is definitely
destined to be a classic in its own realm.
     The movie starts off with the introduction of an old artifacts
salesman who tells us the story of this old magical lamp which he is 
selling, then we go into flashbacks and we are soon introduced to Jafar,
the wicked and power-hungry counselor of the sultan.  He is anxiously
trying to find someone who is worthy enough to go into the mystical
cave of wonder and try to retrieve the lamp.
     And like all fairy tales we are introduced to the hero, the worthy
one who can go and retrieve the lamp.  His name is Aladdin.  One thing 
that definitely must be learned is that all Disney animated features have
been in their own rights classics, and ALADDIN is not to be ignored,
With magnificent animation, truly entertaining songs, and most
definitely terrific performances.  The shining and truly glimmering
light in this movie, is Robin Williams, who portrays the voice of the
genie.  Just his performance in this film makes the movie great.  Of
course there are others such as Lea Solonga who does the singing voice
of Princess Jasmin, and Gilbert Gottfried who supplies his talent for
the voice of Iago, the cruel and malicious parrot who rides on the 
shoulder of his master Jafar.
     In short, if you believe that ALADDIN is a movie that is just for
kids, you are truly mistaken.  Don't miss this movie that will forever
remain a permanent fixture in the Disney family of film.  A terrific
must see--10 points out of 10.  
