Authors
Asya Kamsky
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Blizhnij krug (1992)
     THE INNER CIRCLE is a brilliant, beautiful work of art, shot
entirely in the Soviet Union with three Western actors, a formerly
Soviet director and a depiction of the bigger-than-life effect that
Joseph Stalin had on an entire nation.
     The film starts in 1939, when Ivan Sanchin becomes Stalin's
personal projectionist, and his communal apartment-mates, the Gubermanns
become a statistic in Stalin's infamous purges.  The film follows
Sanchin's devotion to Stalin as paralleled by that of almost every
Soviet.
     Tom Hulce as Sanchin is brilliant.  Lolita Davidovich as his wife
Nastya is heart-breakingly believable.  Bob Hoskins as Beria is
down-right chilling.  The cast of Russian actors is equally impressive,
especially the actress who plays Katya Gubermann as a teenager.
     Several notes about the accuracy of the film.  The actors
portraying the big names of Soviet politics are phenomenal in their
resemblance to their subjects.  Since the film is shot in Russia, the
atmosphere is perfect, especially in the Kremlin scenes, as well as in
the run-down apartment that Sanchin and his wife live in.  The time-line
is off by a couple of years -- the arrests such as the Gubermanns took
place in 1937 not 1939.  And while the film is loosely based on memoirs
of the man that Sanchin's character is based on, that man himself,
living in Moscow, still thinks that Stalin was a god.  
     This film has been playing in New York City for a while, and just
opened in San Francisco.  I don't know how wide a release it will get,
but I would recommend this film to anyone within twenty miles of where
it's playing, at full prices.
