Authors
Lara Shaffer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mask, The (1994)
     Hi.  I am not a movie reviewer.  I'm not even a grown-up.  I'm 13,
and I'd just like to post my opinion of this movie.  I know Jim Carrey is
in it, but I'm not really sure who else is.  I think it's rated PG-13.
Here's the review:
     I think the lesson in this movie that they were trying to teach
you was that you don't need a mask, you can just be yourself.  I think
that they did a lousy job of getting this message across.  It seemed to
me that Jim Carrey, who had found a mask in the river and when he put
it on transformed into an action-packed cartoon character who seemed
to be killing someone or doing something against the law almost every
second... anyway, like I was saying it seemed to me that Jim Carrey
could not get along without the mask.
     There were two main female characters in the movie, one liked Jim
Carrey for the mask, the other liked him just for himself.  If they
were trying to say you don't need a mask they would have had the
sensible girl who liked him without the mask fall in love with him.
But no, she betrayed him and he ended up with the gangster's girlfriend
who liked the guy with the mask better.
     Also they made it look like robbing a bank, shooting people,
tricking the police, getting in jail, and escaping from jail was cool.
It also made smoking look cool.  And people wonder why teenagers start
smoking so early!
     In my opinon the only good part of the movie was when they were
dancing to that Mexican song.  It looked like a fun movie to make, but
it wasn't that great watching it.
