Authors
T. Robin Sutherland
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Rude (1995)
     Despite the local nature of this film (set in the projects of
Toronto's Regent Park), I can only describe RUDE as an exotic film.  It
is overwhelmingly visual, with dark, mosaic images ranging from
distortions of sacred scenes literally painted into the background, to
shots of excessive physical violence which compose the thematic
background for Clement Virgo's stories.  Often presented in montage-ish
segues between scenes, and generally garish in its symbolism, the
viewer cannot stop looking at Virgo's panorama; I walked away feeling
like I needed another viewing just watch the compositions.
     The three stories of the film, already graphically intense in
their narrative, draw extraordinary power from this visual context.
All three stories are set to the pirate radio voice of DJ Rude, whose
sharp and witty monologues float through the film in much the same way
as its images.  This framing device works very well here--neither
condescending, moralizing, nor patronizing.  Simply the voice of pain,
anger, and frustration, coated in slick, deliberate, and decidedly
politically incorrect terms.  It is not a linear compliment to the
film.  It has almost nothing to do with the plotline--rather, it is
tonal and atmospheric, using a voice in much the same as another
director might use a unifying colour or soundtrack.  The effect is
disturbing, but very successful.
     The main plotline concerns an ex-con struggle to be an honest
husband and father, despite pressure to return to the streets as
General Luke, well-paid dealer.  It is an exercise in self-deprecation,
an observation of societal-deprecation, and a very plausible attempt to
negotiate worth in a micro-culture that values an escape from pain
above everything, including life itself.  These are not new themes for
films set in poverty-ridden situations, but Virgo's presentation is
amazingly fresh: character twists, such as presenting a wife as a
police officer, mingle well with intense stand-offs, death-wishing mob
bosses, and even motifs as old as the tortured artist.  This is the
most linear of the three stories, and it hangs together well--in
addition to setting the narrative backdrop for the film, it is "real,"
engaging and empathetic.
     One of the two secondary storylines revolves around a young woman
who must cope with the emotional, psychological and physical aftermath
of a relationship.  Presented less as a story and more as an
impression, the sequence of shots is often internally
inconsistent--conflicting images representing the same memory occur,
and this is often taken to surreal extremes.  Frequently the lips move,
but something different is being said.  These memories are conveyed
effectively with videotape sequences (apparently the boyfriend's
fetish), which become confused and conflated with the real life within
her apartment (all of this story's sequences take place here).  These
distortions, amplified by different filters, uncomfortable angles, and
the use of decorative mannequins strewn about the shots, appropriately
reflect the incongruities she is too conscious of in her mind and
body.  The effect is of a violence almost completely internalized, but
perhaps more powerful in its repression, discovery and exorcism.
     Meanwhile, the audience is also following the problems of a young
man who is forced to wrestle with a fundamental inconsistency: he
belongs to a peer group of gay bashers while wrestling personally with
the issue of homosexuality.  The themes of a boxing movie are utilized
here to deflect some of the violence generated by this tension, but
finally the violence which has developed physically in this benign
direction must explode in the direction of the anger.  Virgo has said
that he wanted to explore the issue of homophobia in black popular
culture, but the film also fits thematically with the other two:  none
of these stories promise better conditions for the next day, but in
some way each of the three leads has found a way to describe themselves
in a way that they can live with.  In a film where life is alternately
very cheap and extremely precious, this successful negotiation of
themes is perhaps the most powerful part of the film.
     It is unbelievable to me that RUDE could have been filmed for a
reported $350,000 by a first-time director.  The acting is more than
convincing, the sets alternate brutal realism with eerie surrealism
very effectively, and to my untrained eye, the technical achievement of
this film rivals almost anything I've seen this year.  Virgo's highly
stylized directing is visually riveting and thematically complex.  To
the criticism that it is overly symbolic: perhaps the same power could
have been delivered a little more subtly, but I am reminded of
something I read in a local review: it does not matter. The film itself
is also about making symbols, icons to hang identity upon, and if it is
overdone here, this too is appropriate.
     There's a rumour going about that Virgo and novelist Michael
Ondatje may make a film together in the near future.  As a big fan of
both artists, I am eager for this to be true.  Meanwhile, I highly
recommend RUDE to anyone with an open-mind, strong stomach, and
not-too-easily upset sensibilities.  A tough tour-de-force for the eye
and the mind.

Title
Review for Johnny Mnemonic (1995)
     On the up side, this was a fun way to spend the afternoon.  A
futuristic action movie with lots of whiz-bang special effects, a
decent soundtrack, and not a few interesting shots and stunts.
     But this will not be one of the science fiction films we look back
on and say "this was a pivotal moment in cinema."  In fact, it seems to
me that somewhere along the line, the society which Gibson & Co. have
helped to fashion with their ideograms of cybericity has caught up and
now dictates to that work.  Too bad.  It would have been nice to seen a
screenplay--so extensively modified from the original short story--take
advantage of the transformation to continue to challenge its audience.
Johnny Neumonic does not do this.  It doesn't come close.  Instead, it
panders to the pop hysteria surrounding the Internet, hacker culture,
and the glitz and glamour which has become associated (ironically) with
the "power (computer) user."
     I dunno.  Maybe I was expecting too much when I found out that
Gibbie was doing the screenplay.  Maybe the cult following which has
been cyberpunk is so much a part of our culture now is just too much to
challenge.  But I don't think so.  It just all smells of a Hollywood
which is much more concerned with flash and bucks than making a good
film.
     Acting?  C'mon--this is sci-fi.  We don't get much of the talent.
Just watch the guys on DS9, B5, or SeaQuest.  I hear they're remaking
DEMOLITION MAN this year as DREDD.  Keanu's prowess as an actor has
never been in question as far as I've been aware, but the guy does have
something besides a 1995 face, which I think I finally have figured
out.  He's Arnie for Generation X.  And Gen-X doesn't use one-liners;
they just let their phases hang there without any meaning.  Done
effectively, this will leave you going "What-?" and KR pulls this off
from time to time.
     But a lot of the scripting was just plain dumb.  Much of it felt
like ninja turtle fare.  Two shots I immediately saw James Bond in.
Lines like "You will regret this," "It's time to let your daughter
die," and "You need to rest," come off as trite and cliche as they are,
and there is finally no way to take anyone seriously.  Reeves' forced
intensity drives the whole thing, along with fairly quickly paced
shooting sequences of fights, special effects, and loud music.
     As for the story itself--the twins are still there, as is the
dolphin and a guy named Ralphie (and a familiar bartender with a
mechanical arm), but even Molly is gone, replaced with a Jane who's
good in a fight, but has none of Molly's cyber-novelty.  Many layers of
story have been added, most of them pointless, some of them seeming to
have the Gibson hint of obscure metaphor, but all drowned in a diatribe
against dependence on the machine.
     Despite all of that, it is fun to watch if you like mind candy and
are not set up for a parable of our times.  Gibson fans will go in
droves and all of them will either be dazzled or disappointed.  And on
the upside once again, this was a short story.  No one seems to have
been stupid enough to go for the mother lode, yet.  If anyone has any
brains, they'll do one or two more short stories first.
     I read an interview in WIRED with Gibson and Robert Longo, which
said that this was originally designed to be a $1.5 million "artsy"
movie, and then went to $30 million budget.  I really wish now that I
could have a chance to see the former.

Title
Review for Michelle Apts., The (1995)
     When I was in the middle of a three-film-per-day schedule at the
Toronto International Film Festival, THE MICHELLE APARTMENTS seemed a
relief from the more intense fare I had picked for myself.  In
retrospect, I find it difficult to find much about the film itself
which I really enjoyed.
     THE MICHELLE APARTMEMTS is not a difficult film to watch.  Athough
somewhat out of place in the noirish camp of this film, Henry Czernys
acting is credible and amusing throughout (for better black comedy see
him in Notes From Underground).  Equally (though differently)
entertaining are Mary Elizabeth Rubens as the psychotic femme fatale
with many secrets, her manic boyfriend (Daniel Kash), and the slightly
deranged couple who maintain the apartment complex.
     Czerny plays government auditor Hatwell who is investigating a
Turnbull Chemicals (We make the food you eat look better!).  His hotel
room is given away to a convention and he must take an apartment in a
very odd complex.  He becomes involved with a beautiful woman (Rubens)
at the laundry room, and through an underwear mixup at the dryer,
eventually ends up on the wrong side of her ex-con boyfriend.
Meanwhile, Turnbull Chemicals seems to be running half of the town from
its confines and is not happy with the presence of an auditor.
     But it maybe that the film was just a little too easy to watch.
The audience is engaged primarily by being kept off balance--how do
you dispose of a body and who might catch you, for example--but as
often as not, the screwball sequences come across as a bit contrived,
cliche, predictable once set in motion, or just not very original in
their resolution.  Of course the ceiling (for example), which has been
rotting throughout the film, will collapse on everyone at the films
climax.  A diner where unusual food is the usual fare (probably
yesterdays special at another restauraunt) seems to serve no real
purpose beyond a change of locale.  And its no surprise that the local
chemical plant being audited is crooked, and will resort to criminal
actions to protect itself--seriously complicating Harwells already
outrageous situation.
     The film does succeed at creating unusual situations--golfing at
midnight in an industrial park was a favorite of mine--but it doesn't
sustain them.  We are too easily taken to our own expectations, and
although we get a few genuinely funny one-liners along the way, the
movement of the story remains one-dimensional and only occasionally
witty.
     THE MICHELLE APARTMENTS is well-acted and competently produced,
providing enough cornball and moments of weirdness to keep you
watching--but this is not a particularly good film.  If it comes to
cable and you cant sleep this will keep you entertained, but don't rent
a room and a projector.


Title
Review for Land and Freedom (1995)
     LAND AND FREEDOM is a difficult film to watch, for many reasons.
First and foremost, it is a war film and since Vietnam, war films
have typically been about skewed politics, lost idealism, the vanity of
the glory of war, and pain and death without reward.  This film is not
an exception.
     It is also initially difficult in that it is a film whose
protagonists are from many different countries: they are volunteers and
mercenaries rallied from across the world to fight Franco in the
Spanish Civil War.  This creates a very rich atmosphere for the drama
of the film as one gets used to the sporadic subtitling, outrageous
accents, and lost dialogue which is either too rapid or stilted to be
translated.
     And it is finally a difficult film to appreciate without a fairly
detailed understanding of the elements of the Spanish Civil War.  To
have known that the Poum (the faction to which the main character has
become attached) was actually a Trotskyist splinter group would have
made a significant difference to my viewing.  Many local political
problems constitute the focus of conflict on both regional and personal
levels.
     But war films are supposed to be hard to watch: war is not a
simple thing--it is the essence of politics, and in this spirit, the
film illustrates many themes.  Textbook idealism, for one, does not
translate well in the battlefield.  What you believe you are fighting
for may be utterly at odds with the politics of your group (despite
their propaganda).  Relationships which are sound and strong may be
lost in a moment over a political detail.  Loyalty wears many
uniforms.  Most of the fighting is not in the trenches.  And, of
course, people die for no comprehensible reason.  All of these points
are made strongly and specifically enough to make you regard them as
more than the cliches of war--they are experiences of each fighter, and
you must see each in its own context.
     This film is beautifully shot.  Most of it is (necessarily)
presented in picturesque outdoor locations which contrast with the
brutality of its action.  Two sequences attract particular attention.
One somewhat overlong sequence outlines the local political infighting
which takes place when the Poum tries to decide to collectivize a
captured estate.  Here it would have been interesting to contrast the
local politics of the Poum against their "official" political line, but
the confusion is indicative of the splintering which causes the
freedom-fighting factions to actually fire on each other later on.  A
second sequence involves the capture of an enemy position--the action
sequence is frantically paced and artfully executed, and creates a
novel build to the film's actual climax.
     Ian Hart has no difficulty in his role as the misplaced man from
Liverpool whose ideals exceed his understanding.  His frustration is as
thick as his loyalty to the principles for which he left his home.  His
character is incredibly honest, and places the common man's plight to
preserve freedom and decency in the world squarely in the swamp of
world politics.  He is easy to identify with, despite his obvious
distance from the audience's context, and it is impossible not to
sympathize with him without being deeply cynical.
     This was not a profound movie for me, but it was an engaging,
educating, and at times, genuinely entertaining film.  I would
recommend it, not as an art film, nor as popular fare, but perhaps as a
film which may provide an honest look at a sparsely filmed bit of
history, presented plausibly from an outsider's point of view.
