Authors
Jeffrey Graebner
Number of Reviews
25

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
        I found TWISTER to be an exhilarating and extraordinarily
entertaining film, but one that features both major successes and
major flaws.  As initial reviews are already reflecting, TWISTER is
going to be a film that is going to be enjoyed by many but shunned by
others.  Depending on your tastes and expectations, this is a film
that could be either a very enjoyable experience or a frustrating
one.
        The visuals are absolutely remarkable, frequently presenting
the audience with images that are unlike anything ever seen in any
movie before.  All of the tornado sequences are absolutely convincing
and  well-designed, with enough variation in the look that the
sequences never seem repetitive.  This film is certainly another
triumph for Industrial Light and Magic.
        The very dynamic and exciting sound design also plays a major
role in creating the impression that the film is really taking you
into the path of a tornado.  This is a movie that absolutely >must

        TWISTER is also an incredibly well-shot and well-directed
film.  As he did with SPEED, Jan De Bont once again shows an
incredible flare for creating inventively staged and frantically
paced action sequences.  The film certainly keeps moving and De Bont
is often successful at creating major tension >without

        Unfortunately, the film's plot and characterizations fall way
short of the visuals.  The story is little more than a series of
cliched situations simply used to string together one spectacular
storm sequence after another.  The script is credited to Michael
Crichton and his wife Anne-Marie Martin.  Reportedly, such top
writers as Joss Whedon and Steven Zaillian did uncredited rewrites. 
It is surprising that such a top-notch group of writers failed to
bring more originality to the script.
        The film's plot primarily depend on well-worn cliches of this
genre, but it frequently doesn't even bother to play them out
completely. The story is centered on husband and wife scientists
(Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt) thrown into one last adventure together
before signing the divorce papers.  Oddly enough, though, the film
spends so little time on the relationship that it never even bothers
to tell us why they split.
        Another element of the plot involves a rival team of
scientists (led by Cary Elwes) racing with the heroes to deploy a
revolutionary research instrument that was invented by Paxton and
Hunt and stolen by Elwes.  Again, this rivalry is never fully
developed, with the conflicts never amounting to much more than
sequences of the two groups passing one another on the highway while
chasing down the same tornados.
        While the characters are mostly cliches, the actors manage to
do a great deal to flesh them out.  I'm sure the studio (or actually
studios, this is a co-production of Warner Bros. and Universal) felt
they were cutting costs by not using big name stars.  In reality, it
worked out for the best since they ended up with a number of actors
that are more talented than famous.
        The women in the film fare far better than the men.  Helen
Hunt, best known for her good work on the TV sitcom "Mad About You",
manages to bring a great deal of personality to her character. 
Through facial expressions and body language, she is able to convey a
facination and awe for the natural phenomena that she has dedicated
here life to studying.  She also conveys much of her feeling for
Paxton's character in the same manner.  Hunt's acting skill fills in
a lot of blanks in the characterization that aren't filled in by the
dialog or situations.
        An unexpectedly effective performance is given by Jami Gertz
as Paxton's new fiance, who ends up being dragged along when he goes
after the tornados.  This is a character that could have easily been
very irritating, but instead Gertz manages to create a very
sympathetic and believable character while also serving several
necessary functions.  In a few scenes she provides some welcome comic
relief as a therapist who occasionally is trying to council patients
on her cellular phone while driving into the path of a tornado.  On
other occasions, she provides the required non-expert so that other
characters can explain scientific details needed by the audience. 
Both Gertz and the writers are to be commended for avoiding the easy
temptation to make this character unpleasantly unsympathetic.
        Bill Paxton's performance is competent, but unlike Hunt and
Gertz he is never really able to rise above the writing.  The film
does leave quite a bit of his motivation somewhat hazy and he doesn't
make much of an attempt to fill in the blanks.  His chemistry with
Hunt is not non-existent, but it isn't spectacular either.  Cary
Elwes comes off even worse, with a role so thinly drawn that you
often forget he is even in the movie.
        There are some recognizable faces in the supporting cast, but
none are ever allowed to make much of an impression.  Hunt and
Paxton's team is made up of a number of familiar types, but nobody is
ever really allowed to create a distinctive personality.  This is
something of a disappointment after the unexpectedly well-defined
supporting characters in De Bont's SPEED.  This difference is
particularly well-illustrated by Alan Ruck, who appeared in both
films.  In SPEED, he had some of the film's best lines in his amusing
role of a tourist who was a passenger on the bus.  In this film, he
is one of the scientists and never has anything more to do than
simply shouting road directions into a radio.
        In the long run, I found that the flaws in TWISTER really just
didn't matter that much.  The film is tremendously enjoyable and
truly showed me sights that I had never seen before.  If you manage
to get into tune with the film's strengths, as I did, the weaknesses
will ultimately seem to not be that important.
-- 
Jeffrey P. Graebner
Columbus, Ohio

Title
Review for Star Trek: Generations (1994)
     Over the past 27 years, "Star Trek" has grown into a phenomenon
that is essentially unmatched in the entertainment world.  Gene
Roddenberry's original idea has now spawned four TV series (with a
fifth starting next year) and seven theatrical motion pictures.  There
are also numerous books and other merchandising.  All of this history
makes STAR TREK: GENERATIONS a tricky film to review.  It needs to be
discussed in terms of its own merits as a film while also looking at
how it fits into the entire "Star Trek" universe.
     This seventh film in the series is the first to feature the cast
of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" lead by Captain Jean-Luc Picard
(Patrick Stewart).  From the original "Star Trek" (and the six previous
films), Captain James T. Kirk (William Shatner) has a supporting role
while Scotty (James Doohan) and Chekov (Walter Koenig) make cameo
appearances early in the film.  All of the "Next Generation" cast
members that were still with the show at the end of its seven-season
run appear in the film.
     The principal villain in the film is Soran (Malcolm McDowell) a
madman who is struggling to return to the mysterious "Nexus," a place
where fantasies become reality.  The entrance is a strange "ribbon"
that travels through space.  Attempts to fly a ship into the Nexus
simply result in the ship being destroyed.  Soran's plan is to alter
the course of the ribbon to allow him to jump into it from the surface
of a planet.  This is accomplished by causing stars to collapse thus
generating gravitational fields that will require the ribbon to change
its course.  Picard and his crew discover his plan and must stop him
before he wipes out an entire civilization.
     This plot is rather ridiculous, but the biggest problem is that it
is also the most confusing plot that has yet been used in a "Star Trek"
movie.  In addition, there are several secondary subplots going on. The
film would have been helped a great deal if the script had been
simplified.  The screenplay is by Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga
from a story by Moore, Braga and producer Rick Berman.  All three came
directly from "Star Trek: The Next Generation" and the film includes
some of the same weaknesses that plagued the last few seasons of that
series.
     The single biggest problem that has been inherited from the series
is the cheat of solving problems by having the characters using
invented technical jargon and unexplained gadgets.  The earlier movies
did all use a lot of invented science, but it was always *explained* in
clear terms within the world of the film.  It was always clear what the
equipment or terms were and what they would do.  That isn't true during
many parts of STAR TREK: GENERATIONS.  Even the central phenomenon of
the "Nexus" is never particularly well explained.
     The script also suffers from a lack of focus.  The movie includes
several subplots that are not really that closely tied into the main
plot.  The most notable of these involves the android Data (Brent
Spiner) adjustment to a new chip that allows him to experience
emotions.  This subplot provides some of the film's best scenes (and
much of its comic relief) as well as the most significant character
development.  The writers never quite manage to tie it in with the rest
of the film, though.  This subplot is very good, but it seems to be
coming from a different movie.
     A subplot involving the Duras sisters, a pair of renegate Klingons
who were originally introduced on the TV series, is integrated a little
better.  It was kind of a shame that they insisted on including
villainous Klingons in this film.  They could have easily been replaced
by Romulans or some other Federation enemy without undermining the fact
that one of the biggest differences between the original series and
"The Next Generation" is the fact that Klingons are now *allies* of the
Federation.  The only hint of this fact in the film is the presense of
Worf (Michael Dorn) on the Enterprise bridge crew.
     Despite the film's script problems, there are some aspects of the
film that are *extremely* good.  The film's biggest asset is a cast who
know their characters well and who clearly work well together.  The
"Next Generation" cast members have built up seven years worth of
familiarity and chemistry all of which clearly shines through in the
film.  Some of the cast members are severely underutilized
(particularly Gates McFadden as Dr. Crusher, who is barely in the
movie), but with the exception of the fourth film (still the best of the
series), all of the "Star Trek" movies have tended to concentrate on
certain cast members to the exclusion of others.  It is very difficult
to give a lot of screen time to every member of such a large cast.
     Scotty and Chekov make their appearances during the film's opening
sequence in which they join Kirk in the dedication of the Enterprise-B
(The ship that was decommissioned at the end of STAR TREK VI: THE
UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY was the Enterprise-A while the ship flown by the
"Next Generation" cast is the Enterprise-D.)  This sequence exists
primarily to set up Kirk's entry into the Nexus so he can later emerge
in the "Next Generation" time frame.  Still, it was a nice touch to
include a couple of the other members of the original cast and they do
have some good scenes together.  It is rather obvious that the scenes
were originally written for Mr. Spock and Dr.  McCoy, though.  They
even have Chekov helping out in sick bay at one point.
     Kirk's presense in the film is clearly intended to ease the
transition of the movies from the old cast to the new.  I'm not
convinced that was entirely necessary (the new cast has had seven TV
seasons to build an audience), but the scenes between Kirk and Picard
are generally enjoyable.  It is nice to see these two characters
meeting face to face.  Over the years, "Star Trek" fans have spent a
lot of time discussing the significant *differences* between Kirk and
Picard, but this film actually concentrates more on the
*similarities*.  The two characters are more alike than one might
think.  It is a bit unfortunate that none of the scenes of Kirk and
Picard together are on the bridge of a Starship.  They missed the
opportunity to allow some first hand comparisons of the two captains'
different ways of commanding a ship.
     The technical aspects of the film are competent, but not always
spectacular.  At times, the TV origins of producer Berman and director
David Carson are noticeable.  The movie is filmed in Panavision, but the
whole frame is rarely used.  Industrial Light and Magic has provided
some very competent special effects for the film, but only two
sequences really allow them to shine.  The first is a wonderful scene
in a Stellar Cartography room on the Enterprise. This really shows off
some of ILM's computer graphics skills.  The second great special
effects sequence can't be described without giving away a key plot
point, but viewers will know it when they see it.
     For the score, Dennis McCarthy has a larger orchestra to work with
than he did for his TV scores, but it still doesn't sound significantly
different.  McCarthy's score isn't horrible, but it is rather bland.
The "Star Trek" film scores have all had a tough time living up to the
tremendous scores that Jerry Goldsmith wrote for the first and fifth
films and James Horner wrote for the second and third.  Like Leonard
Rosenman's score for STAR TREK IV and Cliff Eidelman's score for STAR
TREK VI, McCarthy's work simply doesn't stack up.  The score lacks a
distinctive main theme and McCarthy also repeats Eidelman's mistake of
failing to open the film with Alexander Courage's famous fanfare.
McCarthy (or possibly Carson) also made the very odd choice of leaving
one key fight scene completely unscored.  That sequence was
*desperately* in need of some music.
     While there are some major problems with STAR TREK:  GENERATIONS,
the film certainly does have enough going for it that it is sure to
please even the most casual fans of the series.  As a regular viewer of
"Star Trek: The Next Generation," it is very difficult for me to say
how the film will play for those that are unfamiliar with the TV show.
The film doesn't take much time to re-introduce the characters (many
long-time "Star Trek" fans were probably somewhat put off by the fact
that STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE *did* spend a lot of time
re-establishing the characters).  The actors all know their characters
well, though, and I suspect that even non-fans may be able to catch
up.
     This is a good first effort for the "Next Generation" cast and
crew and it demonstrates that the new cast certainly can carry
themselves on the big screen.  I look forward to additional films
featuring this cast, but I hope that Berman and co. will be smart
enough to concentrate on their current TV series and to pass the
feature films on to people who are more comfortable with that medium.
     There are two key sequences towards the end of STAR TREK:
GENERATIONS that need to be discussed, but which cannot be mentioned
without giving away key plot points.  As a result, I *strongly* suggest
that readers who have not yet seen the film stop reading here.  The
following paragraphs will reveal two major developments that occur in
the film:
     The destruction of the Enterprise-D provides the film's most
spectacular special effects sequence and was also a surprisingly bold
move.  Even though this isn't the first time that the Enterprise has
been destroyed in a Star Trek movie (the original Enterprise was
destroyed in STAR TREK III: THE SEARCH FOR SPOCK), this marks the first
time that the ship has actually been destroyed by enemy fire.  In the
past, the ship has seemed largely indestructible and it was great to
see them show that *not* to be the case.
     Most importantly, the destruction of the Enterprise-D will allow
for the upcoming films to separate themselves more from the TV series.
The next movie will have to introduce an all-new ship providing endless
new possibilities.
     Of course, the other key plot "surprise" is the death of Captain
Kirk (although this is probably one of the worst kept secrets in the
history of movies).  I wasn't really pleased by the way that this was
handled.  Kirk is certainly the type of character that needs a big
heroic death, but this one really wasn't right for him.  STAR TREK:
GENERATIONS shows Kirk dying on a distant planet in another time to
save an unshown race of people.  The character really needed to die in
defense of *his* ship and *his* crew.  This death is very unsatisfying
and surprisingly unmoving.

Title
Review for Frankenstein (1994)
     Sometimes, there can be a very thin line between overindulgence
and brilliance.  Kenneth Branagh's new film adaptation of MARY
SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN frequently straddles that line, occasionally
ending up on both sides of it.  Thankfully, the majority of the movie
stays on the brilliant side.
     Of course, Shelley's tale of Victor Frankenstein and his creation
is one of the best known (and most often filmed) stories (the word
"Frankenstein" even appears in the dictionary).  Most past film
versions have only stuck with Shelley's very basic premise, while
making radical changes to the specifics. The screenplay to this film,
by Steph Lady and Frank Darabont, goes back to the original novel for a
much more faithful adaptation.  There are certain changes made to
accommodate the differences between the film and literature, but the
film depicts a number of incidents from the novel that have not been
present in other adaptations.  It is also much more true to the *spirit*
of the original story, particularly in its portrayal of the creature.
     Unlike the best known adaptations of the past, the creature
(played here by Robert DeNiro) is not a monosyllabic brute.  Instead,
he is given a great deal of intelligence and very deep emotion.  The
creature has significantly heightened strength, but his feelings are
also equally enhanced.  It is these emotions that make him dangerous,
but they also make him quite human.  This conflict, along with Victor's
inability to truly understand what he has created, forms the heart of
this film.
     As in the original novel, the story is told in flashback as Victor
(played by Branagh himself) recounts his tale to a ship captain (Aidan
Quinn) who encounters him while obsessively searching for a water
passage to the North Pole.  We learn that, after his mother dies giving
birth to his younger brother, Victor  becomes so obsessed with death
that he begins experimenting with ways to defeat it.  In time, this
obsession leads him to the actual desire to *create* life.  While
studying to become a doctor, Victor meets Professor Waldman (John
Cleese, who is virtually unrecognizable) who has come very close to
achieving this goal.  After Waldman himself is killed, Victor takes
over his work and creates the creature.  After Victor becomes convinced
that his creation is evil, he abandons it to die.  Eventually, the
creature learns to think, speak, and even read.  He reads Victor's
journals and returns seeking either vengeance, peace, or probably
both.
     The other key character in the story is Elizabeth (Helena Bonham
Carter), the adoptive sister who eventually becomes Victor's love.  The
irony in this romance comes from the fact that Victor is so obsessed
with defeating death that he fails to see that this woman is
representative of real *life*.  He is struggling to create life, when
he already *has* it.  There is one very pivotal sequence towards the
end of the film which was not in Shelley's novel, but which manages to
explore this aspect of the story in a very powerful and moving way.
Even if it wasn't in the original novel, it is a wonderful
extrapolation of one of the story's key ideas.
     While the story of Frankenstein is unquestionably a horror story,
it is important to distinguish between horror and being scary.  Many of
the events portrayed in this film are horrific, but they are *not*
particularly scary.  People going into the film expecting constant
shocks and scares are likely to be disappointed.  The movie is somewhat
gory at times (there are a few bloody scenes and the creation of the
creature involves quite a bit of bodily fluid), but the gore is never
gratuitous.
     This is a story that is full of passion and powerful emotions.
Both as a director and as an actor, Kenneth Branagh's classical
theatrical background leads him to a style of heightened, almost
indulgent emotion.  Branagh very rarely plays anything small, but
instead is virtually always playing scenes out to the hilt.  The result
is a film that is frantic and breathless, but also is full of powerful
images and emotions.
     Branagh's performance as Victor is one of constant motion.  He
shows the obsessive personality of the character by constantly running
from place to place, often dripping in sweat and shouting his dialog.
The performance is very theatrical and occasionally goes over-the-top,
but it all really manages to fit the character.  In many ways, we are
able to actually *feel* Victor's obsession through Branagh's grandiose
and passionate performance.
     In contrast, DeNiro's performance is much quieter and more
controlled.  He is required to go from scenes of quiet tenderness to
other scenes of pure rage.  The real key to the character is that he
feels these powerful emotions, but he was never taught how to control
them.  After Victor's abandonment, he was forced to mature on his own
without any kind of moral guidance.  The makeup effects do a good job
at making DeNiro look frightening while still allowing him to do a
great deal of acting with his facial expressions.  DeNiro is often able
to express a lot of emotion with very little dialog.  It is another
courageous and fascinating performance by one of the most daring actors
of our time.
     The real strength of this story is that neither Victor or his
creation can be classified as either a hero or a villain.  While this
is a cautionary tale about the possible consequences of science, it
leaves a lot of question about whether it is the actual *act* of
creating a life that is immoral or if it is Victor's treatment of that
life once the creation is finished.  The film introduces the
possibility that the story might have turned out differently if Victor
had nurtured his creation instead of abandoning him.
     As Elizabeth, Helena Bonham Carter is often required to serve as
the voice of reason in the midst of all that is happening.  She needs
to provide a kind of moral touchstone for Victor.  Unfortunately, this
is one aspect of the film that doesn't quite work as well as it
should.  For one thing, she simply doesn't have enough scenes with
Branagh.  The movie could have used a little more time exploring the
relationship between these two characters.  There is nothing
particularly wrong with Bonham Carter's performance but, with the
exception of a few brief scenes, there really isn't a lot of chemistry
developed between her and Branagh.
     The film includes a strong supporting cast as well.  Cleese gives
a surprisingly effective, purely dramatic performance as Professor
Waldman.  Tom Hulce provides most of the film's comic relief as Henry,
a college friend of Victor's.  He is also the only other character
(besides Victor and the creature) who is aware of Victor's
experimentation, thus providing an occasional source for questioning
dialog.  Another very effective performance is given by Richard Briers
as an elderly blind peasant who is the only person who is able to get
past the creature's appearance and recognize his humanity.  As the sea
captain, Aidan Quinn's performance is probably the weakest in the
film.  Quinn makes the mistake of attempting an accent which comes and
goes, but is never believable.
     The production and set design as well as the cinematography in
this film are all outstanding and very inventive.  The actual creation
sequence is one of the most breathtakingly exciting sequences placed on
film in recent memory.  Branagh's usual musical collaborator Patrick
Doyle provides a dramatic score that occasionally threatens to become
overbearing, but never quite overstays its welcome.  The music
contributes a great deal to the power of some of the key scenes.
     This is a very visually oriented film and the dialog does
occasionally seem a bit stilted.  The story occasionally becomes pretty
complicated and on occasion writers Lady and Darabont do give in to the
temptation to overexplain things a bit.  On a whole, though, the
writing is strong and does a very good job at exploring the many
interesting ideas in this story.
     A lot of people are probably going to be turned off when they
discover that MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN is not the type of movie they
are expecting.  It takes a very different approach from other past film
versions of this story. Some may be turned off by the film's relative
lack of scares while others may be bothered by the giddy excesses of
Branagh's classically theatric style.  On the other hand, though, I
think others will, like me, be intrigued by the fascinating themes and
ideas explored while also being seduced by the sheer emotion of the
film.  I feel that this is one of the most exciting cinematic
experiences of 1994.

Title
Review for Little Women (1994)
     At their best, family-oriented stories should have the same depth
and intelligence of those that are intended primarily for adults.  The
makers of the latest film adaptation of Louisa May Alcott's LITTLE
WOMEN recognized the intelligence in the story and have created a very
literate and mature film.  The film is full of wonderful characters and
situations that should appeal to everyone whether young or old, male or
female.
     The film lovingly presents a few years in the lives of the March
family, led by Marmie (Susan Sarandon) the poor but loving mother of
four daughters.  Most of the film centers around Jo (Winona Ryder), the
strong-willed daughter who hopes to one day become a writer.  The other
daughters are romantic Meg (Trini Alvarado), quietly contented Beth
(Claire Danes), and artistic Amy (played early in the film by Kirstin
Dunst and later portrayed by Samantha Mathis).  The film also
introduces us to three key men in the lives of the March family: Thomas
"Laurie" Lawrence (Christian Bale), the boy next door who becomes the
sister's closest outside friend; Laurie's tutor (Eric Stoltz) who
captures Meg's heart; and finally a German professor (Gabriel Byrne)
who meets Jo in New York and encourages her to write from her heart.
     It is initially tempting to say that LITTLE WOMEN does not have
much of a story, but that really isn't accurate.  The story here simply
follows the lives of a group of believable and realistic characters.
The film never seems overplotted or allows the story to overwhelm the
characterizations.  By the end of the film, the characters all seem
like very real people and we have seen an interesting portion of their
lives.
     I have never read Alcott's original novel so I don't know how much
she balanced the time given to each of the sisters.  For this
adaptation, screenwriter Robin Swicord and director Gillian Armstrong
selected to focus the majority of their attention on Jo.  This turns
out to be a wise decision, providing the film with a strong central
focus by allowing the audience to see the other characters mainly
through her eyes.  Occasional voice-over narration is used to
strengthen the feeling that Jo is telling us the story.
     This focus on Jo places a lot of importance on Winona Ryder's
performance. Ryder gives an Oscar-worthy performance, which is a large
part of the reason why the film works so well.  Over the last several
years, Ryder has established herself as one of the most distinguished
actors of her generation.  She has been courageous with her selection
of roles and she is just as good in period roles such as this as she is
in more contemporary films.  Ryder brings a great deal of strength,
intelligence and determination to her performance as Jo.  Her Jo is
something of a tomboy, but also has a definite feminine side that she
doesn't hesitate to show when appropriate.
     One of Ryder's greatest strenghts as an actress is her very
expressive face that allows her to often convey much more then just the
simple, literal meaning of her dialog.  This is a skill that is put to
good use a number of times in this film.  There is one scene in
particular late in the film where her facial expression adds a bunch of
additional meaning to a very simple one-line answer to a question.
This generated a strongly positive reaction from the audience at the
screening I attended.
     Ryder's performance as Jo provides an interesting contrast to her
Oscar-nominated performance in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.  Both films take
place in similar periods and concentrate quite a bit on societal roles
(particularly for women).  In the earlier film, Ryder's character
seemed outwardly innocent and naive as she went along with the rules of
society while subtlely showing that she was aware of, and even
controlling, everything that was going on.  As Jo, she is much more
vocal about her feelings as she frequently and consciously goes against
society's expectations.  Comparing these two exceptional performances
strongly illustrates Ryder's impressive range.
     While Ryder tends to dominate the film, several of the other
actors are also able to make strong impressions.  As the one sister who
is most torn between the traditions of society and the desire for a
more liberated life, Trini Alvarado's Meg shows some interesting inner
conflicts.  In her own way, she bucks tradition just like her sisters.
Claire Danes (who is so good on the vastly underappreciated TV series
"My So-Called Life") gives the film's most subtle performance.  Beth's
ambitions in life are less grand than those of her sisters, but she is
able to quietly find her own form of happiness.  When her life starts
to take a tragic turn of direction late in the film, Danes is given
some interesting opportunities to shine.
     Amy ends up being the film's weakest character.  In the first part
of the film, she is very well-played by Kirstin Dunst (the young
vampire in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) who brings a lot of spunk and
sparkle to the role.  About two-thirds of the way through the film,
there is a four-year jump forward in time and Samantha Mathis takes over
the role.  At this point, the four sisters go their separate ways and
the film (wisely) continues to concentrate primarily on Jo.
Unfortunately, this leaves Mathis with very little time to make much of
an impression.  There really isn't anything seriously wrong with
Mathis' performance, but it is jarring to have the sudden shift in
actors (particularly since Dunst's performance is a hard act to follow)
and the movie never fully overcomes this.
     Susan Sarandon does not have a lot of screen time as Marmie, but
she gives her usual skilled performance.  Her character is unusually
liberated for her time, but she never seems anachronistic.  It is clear
that she is very *aware* of the customs of the time, but simply does
not fully believe in some of them.  Sarandon portrays Marmie as a stern
parent who is also clearly very loving and fair. It is very easy to
understand why her daughters respect her and it is also clear that the
respect is mutual.
     Other than the Marchs, the most visible character in the film is
Laurie.  Ever since his stunning debut performance in Steven
Spielberg's EMPIRE OF THE SUN, Christian Bale has continued to give one
strong performance after another in a variety of period films
(including HENRY V, NEWSIES and SWING KIDS).  Even when the films have
not been very good, his performances have been just fine.  Bale plays
Laurie as a character who is close to all of the March sisters in a
series of relationships that even he does not fully understand.  He
brings some impressive emotion to the scenes where he explores these
relationships, although his relationship with the older Amy probably
should have been a little more fully explored.
     As the other key men in the lives of the March sisters, Gabriel
Byrne and Eric Stoltz are not given much screen time but give decent
performances (although Byrne's German accent takes a little getting
used to).  Even though Byrne is second billed in the film, he doesn't
even appear until the last half hour and only has a few major scenes.
Those scenes are pivotal to the story, though, and he and Ryder work
well together.
     One particularly effective aspect of Swicord's script (and I
assume this comes from Alcott's novel) is the respect and admiration
that it shows for the art of writing.  Jo's desire to write seems
exceptionally genuine and the film does take the time to show some of
the sense of liberation that can come from expressing your feelings on
paper.  The sequence in which Jo finally is inspired to truly write
from her heart is one of the best staged depictions of the *act* of
writing that I have seen on film.
     The cinematography and production design very effectively express
the look of the period.  The details seem very authentic and believable
and the camerawork never gets in the way of the storytelling.  Although
many filmmakers tend to shoot this type of period drama in scope, the
decision to shoot this one in a narrower format was a wise one.  The
intimate nature of the story might have been harmed by a wider format.
     I truly hope that this smart and very engaging drama manages to
find the audience that it deserves.  I worry that people will avoid the
film on the basis of it being a "children's movie" or a "woman's
movie".  In truth, it is simply a good, smart drama with some teriffic
performances.  It is one of the best films of 1994.

Title
Review for Goofy Movie, A (1995)
     Last night, I attended a sneak preview of WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING
(a terrific film) and after the movie the theater manager announced
that the audience was welcome to stick around for the 9:20 showing of A
GOOFY MOVIE (of course, they did this after the credits so there were
only 3 or 4 of us that actually heard the announcement... )
     The movie is kind of cute and I suspect young kids might like it
quite a bit, but I wasn't exceptionally impressed by it.  Goofy has
always been one of my favorite Disney characters.  His cheerful
ineptitude has a very definite charm and appeal.  My biggest
disappointment was the fact that Goofy was reduced to a supporting role
in a film that includes his name in the title.  Did Disney think that
kids today are unable to relate to and enjoy the film unless it is
centered around a kid?  When I was a kid, I never had any problems
enjoying Goofy on his own.
     I seem to recall that Disney had an afternoon TV series featuring
Goofy a few years ago, but I don't think I ever saw it.  Perhaps the
characters in this movie based on that series.  The movie seemed to be
lacking in a back story (the explanation of how Goofy became a single
parent seemed an obvious omission).  If the back story came from the TV
series, I suppose that might explain it.
     The film was made by Disney's animation studio in France.  Until
recently, that was their TV animation department, but they are now
simply known as "Disney Animation France" (meaning that they also do
features).  The animation doesn't have the same depth or detail of
Disney's major animated features, but it still is a generally good
looking film.  It is easily several cuts above most TV animation and
seemed to be on a par with most non- Disney animated features.  There
are a lot of bright colors and the characters are very expressive.  The
backgrounds generally tended to be flat and non-descript, though.
     I guess Disney has now decided that every animated film they do
has to be a musical, but many of the songs seemed to be shoehorned in
here. A few of them were kind of catchy, but they never quite seemed to
fit in extremely well.  The movie might have worked a bit better
without them.
     The movie is pleasant enough and it does have a number of amusing
sequences (my favorites were the parody of Disney's "Country Bear
Jamboree" attraction and the disco-dancing Bigfoot), but my overall
reaction was that I would have rather seen a movie strictly about the
Goofy of the old Disney short subjects.

Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
     With THE NET, Sandra Bullock has once again taken a film that
could have been a complete loser and made it quite enjoyable.  She has
an extremely natural charm that is just incredibly appealing to me.
The main reason that the movie worked for me was that I found myself to
be *instantly* sympathetic towards her.  There are very few actors out
there that are able to project such a high level of instant
likability. (Someone should consider casting her as a villain one of
these times.  I have a hunch such a move would be quite disturbing,
particularly if the character's nature turned out to be a surprise.)
     From a plausibility standpoint, the film is something of a
mixed-bag.  The very basic idea of someone's identity being erased via
manipulation of computer records is presented in a way that isn't hard
to believe.  It is a bit of a paranoid fantasy, but that kind of
paranoia has often been the basis of this type of thriller.  In
reality, the whole idea probably *isn't* that completely far-fetched.
Society has become awfully dependent on computer records and computer
security isn't as tight as we would probably like it to be.
     What is pretty outlandish is the larger plot that is the basis of
the whole situation.  Bullock's situation results when she stumbles on
a conspiracy so sweeping that only Oliver Stone would be likely to
believe it.  Luckily, the story doesn't typically take center stage in
the film.  It is Bullock's down- to-Earth performance that kept me from
thinking too much about the basic implausibilities of the story.
     The film is generally pretty good with the computer-related
details, although it does occasionally spruce things up a bit for the
camera.  The movie does include some unlikely uses of voice synthesis
as well as some screen displays that are more photogenic than they
really need to be (this movie contains yet another example of the
"photogenic computer virus" that seems to be popular in movies right
now).  For the most part, though, the filmmakers manage to get much of
the language right and the computers aren't usually given capabilities
beyond the realm of possibility.  Those of us that are real-life
computer nuts will tend to appreciate the accuracy of the terminology,
even if much of it may go right past many viewers.
     While Bullock's performance is the heart and soul of this film,
the supporting cast is also good.  As the villain, Jeremy Northam
provides an appropriate mix of charm and menace.  The best part of the
performance is that he is able to bring an odd *warmth* to the
character that makes him all the more hateful.  Villains in this type
of film typically have much colder personalities, making Northam's
performance something of a refreshing change.  As the only friend that
Bullock is able to trust, Dennis Miller brings some welcome, although
brief, comic-relief to the film.
     During much of this movie, director Irwin Winkler appears to
believe that he is making a tribute to Alfred Hitchcock.  There are a
few scenes that seem to be taken almost shot-for-shot out of classic
Hitchcock films.  In fact, the whole film really feels like a
modernized Hitchcock movie.  It doesn't quite have the plot ingenuity
that Hitchcock managed, but Bullock's character certainly has all the
makings of one of Hitch's "everyman" protagonists.
     Largely thanks to the extremely welcome presence of Sandra
Bullock, THE NET is one of this summer's most satisfying and
entertaining thrillers.  It should advance Bullock one more step
towards superstardom.

Title
Review for Milk Money (1994)
     MILK MONEY is a smart, funny comedy that presents a very knowing
look at early adolescence while also showing a believable and charming
romance between two unlikely adults.  The film is only slightly
undermined by a somewhat inappropriate climax.
     As the film begins, we meet three pre-teen boys who are just
starting to become facinated and curious about the opposite sex.  They
decide to pool their money and go to nearby New York City because they
had heard there were girls there who would take their clothes off for
money.  There they meet a kindly prostitute played by Melanie
Griffith.  When her car breaks down after driving the boys home, one of
them begins working to bring her together with his lonely, widowed
father.  The premise is difficult to describe in print without making
the film sound kind of lurid, but it is actually handled with a great
deal of sensitivity.  It is also surprisingly believable.
     The greatest strength of John Mattson's screenplay is the very
convincingly drawn characters.  The very first scene of the film
features the three boys up in a treehouse trying to outdo each other
with gross comments.  The scene generates a lot of laughs from the
audience, but these boys also sound like >real

     Griffith's character is also very well written.  She is written as
a good person who has simply ended up in an undesirable lifestyle.  The
film does not glamourize prostitution in any way.  Instead, quite a bit
of time is spent on the dehumanizing aspect of it and on Griffith's
strong wish to get her humanity back.  This film will likely generate
some comparisons with PRETTY WOMAN, and I think its biggest advantage
over that film is the fact that Griffith's character is not rescued by
a client (I suppose you could argue that the kids were "clients", but
not in the same way as the Richard Gere character in PRETTY WOMAN).  In
this film, the character is rightfully shown as needing to get >away

     After giving some teriffic performances early in her career,
Griffith's last several films have been very disappointing.  This is
the best role that she has had since WORKING GIRL and she is absolutely
teriffic in it.  This character is smart and streetwise, but also has a
certain sadness and even a hint of innocence.  The character goes
through a number of emotional transformations during this film and
Griffith plays them all convincingly.  It pleases me immensely to see
her in such a good role once again.
     Ed Harris may seem like an odd choice to play a romantic lead
opposite Griffith, but they have a surprising amount of chemistry.
Harris' character shows a great deal of love and caring towards his
son, but also a certain sadness as he has never quite stopped mourning
his wife (who died in childbirth).  The warm, tentative romance between
Harris and Griffith is very well played and effective.  Harris has
always had a talent for playing characters who seem gruff on the
outside, but with a great deal of warmth between the surface.  This
talent is definitely on display in this character.
     The young actor who plays Harris' son is also very good
(unfortunately, I didn't catch his name and it isn't listed in the
advertisements for the film).  Many of the film's best scenes involve
the slow development of the relationship between Griffith and the boy.
In fact, the film really could have used more scenes between them.  The
son's relationship with the other kids is also very well played.  He is
allowed to take some very tentative first steps towards romance with
some of the other kids his age and this is very realistically played.
The kid had quite a few scenes that brought back childhood memories.
     Unfortunately, Mattson included an unnecessary subplot involving a
mobster (played by Malcolm McDowell, in a seriously over-the-top
performance) trying to find Griffith under the belief that she has
stolen some money from her pimp.  Luckily, this subplot is kept in the
background during most of the film, but it does come to the foreground
during the film's climax.  The result is a climactic sequence where the
romance and characters are largely replaced by unnecessary action
sequences (the film >really

     Richard Benjamin has had a spotty career as a director with films
ranging from dreadful (MY STEPMOTHER IS AN ALIEN) to pretty good
(MERMAIDS).  This is probably his best directing job, showing good
comic timing and bringing out some strong performances.  The film is
also the first project from the new production company founded by
former Spielberg partners Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall and it
shows that they may have been major contributors to the general high
quality of productions that have come out of Amblin Entertainment over
the years.
     While MILK MONEY isn't a perfect film, it is very funny and
entertaining with a surprisingly smart script and some teriffic
performances.  It is very much worth seeing.

Title
Review for Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles (1994)
     Initially, the premise of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE seems to be
an intriguing one: the depiction of the day-to-day lives of a group of
vampires.  We quickly learn that their lives are basically tediously
repetitive and ultimately without meaning.  Unfortunately, the same
terms of description can be used to describe the movie itself.
     The movie opens with a young journalist (Christian Slater) sitting
down to interview a man that he apparently has randomly selected off of
the street.  Much to the interviewer's surprise, his subject turns out
to be a vampire named Louis (Brad Pitt).  The bulk of the film is shown
in flashback as Louis relates the story of his life, starting at the
point when he was made into a vampire by a seductive and mysterious
vampire named Lestat (Tom Cruise).  The other key character in the film
is Claudia (Kirsten Dunst), who becomes a vampire as a young child,
thus forcing her to remain forever in a child's body.
     This is essentially a plotless movie, opting instead to
concentrate on the characters and the vampire lifestyle.  Anne Rice's
script (based on her novel) seems to indicate that the life of a
vampire is rather monotonous.  After a while, the film falls into a
very repetitive pattern with seemingly endless scenes of the vampires
seeking out the blood of mortals to drink.  After one or two of these
scenes, the film makes it very clear that the vampires have very little
difficulty obtaining victims.  Rice gives the vampires an ability to
essentially cast a spell over mortals, causing them to freely give
themselves over, eliminating any real conflict.  The film also never
bothers to tell the audience enough about the victims to really care
about their fate.  Louis spends a lot of time fretting over the
morality of it all, but the script makes it very hard for the audience
to feel much sympathy for this.
     The movie attempts to compensate for the fact that little actually
happens by piling on symbolism and subtext.  The vampires' victims are
often shown having an almost orgasmic reaction to being bit,
emphasising a parallel between vampirism and sexuality.  The film also
introduces a strong hint of homoeroticism early on in the relationship
between Louis and Lestat and later in a severely underdeveloped
relationship between Louis and Armand (Antonio Banderas), a charming
vampire that he meets in Paris.  The film glosses over this latter
relationship so quickly that it is difficult to ever figure out why it
is even in the film.
     Like Kenneth Branagh's recent film adaptation of MARY SHELLEY'S
FRANKENSTEIN, this film isn't really meant to be scary.  There may be a
few scenes that will startle a bit, but the movie never really inspires
any actual feelings of fear or dread in the viewer.  Rice's script is
much more concerned with the characters and subtext than it is with
surprising or horrifying the audience.  This is a valid approach, but
unlike Branagh's film this movie never really manages to generate much
interest.
     The two-hour running time of the movie really isn't enough time to
explore any of the subtext with much depth while also introducing the
characters and moving forward the film's minimal plot.  While Rice
probably had time to explore these things much further in her novel
(which I haven't read), they largely get lost in the shuffle here.
Similarly, some of the details about the nature of the vampires' lives
are also left muddled.  In particular, the issue of how a vampire can
be killed, as well as the *consequences* of that act, are largely left
unexplained.  Towards the middle of the film, one vampire "rule"
becomes very important to the plot even though it hadn't even been
*mentioned* earlier.
     Another area that is left very unclear is the concept of a "dark
gift" that is mentioned by several characters.  The impression is that
every vampire is given a different "dark gift," but this is an idea
that is simply introduced and otherwise left unexplored.  The film
implies that this is somehow important, but I could never figure out
why.
     Even prior to the start of filming, the casting of Tom Cruise as
Lestat generated a lot of controversy.  The fans of Rice's novel were
outraged by the decision and Rice herself expressed strong displeasure
with the choice (although she eventually publicly recanted after seeing
the completed film).  After all of this controversy, it turns out that
Cruise's performance is the best thing about the film.  Cruise plays
the role with a great deal of finesse and seductive charm.  When
necessary, he is also able to bring in an appropriate amount of
menace.  This performance is unlike anything that Cruise has done
before and the film absolutely comes to life whenever he is on-screen.
     Despite the top billing and the publicity surrounding the role,
Cruise's Lestat is really only a supporting character in the film.
Brad Pitt's Louis is the central character.  This ends up being one of
the film's biggest problems.  Pitt plays Louis with a constantly sullen
and generally lifeless tone.  The character may very well have been
written this way, but that doesn't make him any less dull.  It doesn't
take very long to tire of Louis' constant sour whining.
     When Cruise disappears during most of the final third of the film,
there is really very little of interest left.  It certainly doesn't
help that the final third transplants the action to another locale (the
early scenes take place in New Orleans while these later scenes are in
Paris).  It is a bit late in the film for such a radical shift.  At
this point, the film introduces several new characters without any time
to really let us learn anything about them.  In addition to Banderas as
Armand, these scenes also introduce Stephen Rea as a bizarre vampire
named Santiago and Domiziana Giordano as a mortal named Madeleine, who
becomes a mother figure for Claudia.  It is possible that this sequence
and these characters were all better developed in Rice's novel (or that
the characters are important for the sequels), but none of these
characters generate any kind of real impression in the movie.
     Claudia is the most original character in this story, but the film
falls short of using her to her full potential.  Kirsten Dunst is very
effective as someone that is eternally trapped between childhood and
adulthood.  Some fans of the novel have complained that at age twelve,
Dunst is nearly twice as old as the character was in the novel.  That
was probably an unavoidable change.  I simply don't believe that a
six-year-old could have convincingly played this character.  In fact,
it is surprising that a twelve-year-old was able to play it so well.
The character is weakened by the fact that Rice's script does not spend
enough time exploring Claudia's relationship with Louis and Lestat or
her desires to grow up.  We are given hints that her relationship with
the two older vampires may be deeper than just that of a parent/child,
but the film never follows up on this.  The movie does include a few
brief, effective scenes in which Claudia expresses her distress at
never growing into an adult body, but these just left me wishing for
more insight into this aspect of the character.
     The majority of the film's problems can be directly traced to Anne
Rice's script.  The script tries to jam in far too much material,
meaning that there isn't enough time to really explore any of it as
much as it needed.  Some of the dialog is also stilted and unnatural.
There are a number of scenes where the characters seem to be speaking
in verse, but it ends up just sounding pretentious and occasionally
downright silly.  Pitt in particular never seems to get the hang of how
to deliver this kind dialog.  It doesn't help that the dialog style
seems to switch indiscriminately between this poetic style and more
standard modern dialog.
     Of course, the fact that the story is told through an interview
required that Pitt provide voice-over narration, but this also isn't
used very effectively.  There are far too many scenes in which the
narration seems to be simply *describing* what is visibly happening on
screen or is about to happen.  Only occasionally is the narration used
to actually provide any insight that couldn't have been figured out
without it.
     Director Neil Jordan piles on quite a bit of blood and gore in the
film, but he does wisely cut away pretty quickly in most cases.  The
early scene where Louis becomes a vampire is the one place where he
probably does linger a bit too long.  I suspect that this is the scene
that has prompted some of the publicized walkouts.  I did find myself
getting a bit queasy during this scene and I had to look away from the
screen.  This movie is definitely not for the squeamish.
     Stan Winston has created some very subtle and effective vampire
makeup.  He creates a believable look for the vampires while still
allowing the actors' facial expressions to come through.  Dante
Ferretti's gothic-style production design is very interesting and
impressive, but is sometimes undermined by Philippe Rousselot's
photography.  Rousselot has a strong tendency to put the camera right
on top of the action, often in situations where a wider shot would have
been much more effective.  The inevitable dark lighting combined with
the overly "in your face" camerawork makes it occasionally difficult to
figure out what is going on.  The film would have been much more
effective visually if the camera had simply been pulled back a bit.
The movie probably would have also benefited if it had been shot in a
wider aspect ratio.
     Composer Elliot Goldenthal was brought in to write a last minute
replacement score and has come up with one that is serviceable but not
particularly impressive.  The score isn't intrusive, but there were
times where the movie might have been helped by a little more aggressive
music.
     While, fans of Anne Rice's novel may be able to fill in some of
the serious gaps in the film, I found myself to be occasionally
confused and frequently bored by INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE.  Good
performances by Tom Cruise and Kirsten Dunst along with a few
intriguing ideas are not enough to save this film from a general
tedium.

Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
     THE RIVER WILD is one of the most entertaining and intelligent
thrillers to come along in quite a while, largely due to an absolutely
first-rate cast lead by Meryl Streep.  The wonderful cast and
well-staged action sequences are able to easily overcome a slightly
contrived, occasionally predictable plot.
     Streep stars as a history teacher and mother of two who had worked
as a river guide in her youth.  While taking her young son (Joseph
Mazzello) on a vacation down the river, she makes the mistake of
helping out a stranded boater (Kevin Bacon) who turns out to have a
dangerous secret.  Eventually, Streep is forced to guide Bacon and his
partner (John C. Reilly) down the river along with her son and husband
(David Strathairn).
     Throughout her career, Meryl Streep has proven herself to be an
extraordinarily versatile actor who fits easily into a wide variety of
genres.  It comes as no surprise that she is instantly believable and
seems completely at home in this type of action film.  Streep goes
through a wide range of emotions here, ranging from exhilaration during
the early parts of her journey eventually shifting to immense strength
mixed with occasional moments of fear, anger, and even hatred.  In
numerous scenes, she is able to wordlessly convey a great deal of
emotion through simple facial expressions and body language.  In a
couple scenes, Streep responds to Bacon's actions with wordless stares
that say more than many actors could manage with pages of dialog.
     In the past, Kevin Bacon has usually relied on his boyish charm to
create instantly likable and sympathetic characters.  In this film, he
shows a surprising dark side.  The combination of his usual charm with
occasional shifts to controlled rage create a very effective villain.
John C. Reilly's performance as Bacon's occasionally reluctant partner
is also quite good.  There are several strong scenes where even Reilly
expresses shock at what Bacon is capable of doing.
     David Strathairn continues to be one of the most underappreciated
actors working in film today.  I think the main thing that has kept him
from being better known is that he is so chameleon-like that he can
give two good performances that many people won't even realize are
coming from the same actor.  He is absolutely terrific here in a
somewhat underwritten role that could easily have been a throw-away if
it had been played by a lesser actor.  Instead, Strathairn creates an
interesting character who grows quite a bit during the course of the
film.
     Finally, Joseph Mazzello is sweet and completely believable as the
young son.  Coming after strong performances in JURASSIC PARK and
SHADOWLANDS, this film certainly helps to establish Mazzello as one of
the best child actors currently working.
     While the performances are all outstanding, the story isn't quite
as strong. The biggest problem was the inclusion of a subplot involving
problems in Streep and Strathairn's marriage.  This subplot is
contrived and predictable and tends to occasionally slow the film down,
particularly during the early scenes.  Largely because of this subplot,
the film takes a little long to get the main plot rolling.  Once it
does, though, the subplot is largely dropped and the film moves at a
very quick pace.
     Despite these plot problems, writer Dennis O'Neill and director
Curtis Hanson largely manage to keep things moving and to avoid most of
the common pitfalls of this type of action film.  There aren't any
moments where the characters do anything that seems stupid nor does the
plot ever seem particularly implausible.  It is especially refreshing
to see action heroes who genuinely seem frightened by their situation
and to be aware of the danger.  The acts of heroism seem to be
genuinely done with a great deal of concern and uncertainty.
     Robert Elswit's Panavision photography takes advantage of the
gorgeous landscape to generate some breathtaking shots without ever
allowing the camera to get in the way of the action.  The action
sequences are all very well staged so that it is easy to tell what is
happening.  Jerry Goldsmith was brought in to score the film at the
last minute after Maurice Jarre's score was deemed unsuitable, but the
music is very good and certainly doesn't seem like a rush job. My only
complaint is that we were once again deprived of a Goldsmith suite over
the end credits in order to make room for a pop song.
     Hopefully, THE RIVER WILD will be a big hit for Universal proving
that there is a market for an intelligent action film with a top-notch
cast.  This movie is a lot of fun.

Title
Review for While You Were Sleeping (1995)
     The romantic comedy is a mainstay of popular entertainment,
existing in theater and literature that predated the movies.  As other
genres have come in and out of favor in Hollywood, filmmakers have
continued to regularly produce new romantic comedies.  While the
characters and situations change, the basic form has remained
remarkably consistent.
     The genre's best entries are those that follow believable
characters through interesting situations leading to romance.  The best
romantic comedies strike a delicate balance between complicated
situations that border on fantasy and believable characters that seem
like real people.  The specifics of the situations portrayed may seem
unlikely, but it is important that the audience be able to relate to
the characters.  We need to believe that these could be real people
that we know--or even that they are much like ourselves.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a very strong and smart romantic
comedy.  It starts from an outlandish premise, but it features central
characters with such realistic behavior and emotions that we are able
to completely accept everything that happens.  The result is a very
appealing film with some surprising depth of emotion.
     Sandra Bullock stars as Lucy Moderatz, a lonely tollbooth
attendant for the Chicago Transit Authority.  She secretly pines for
Peter Callaghan (Peter Gallagher), a handsome stranger who wordlessly
passes by her booth every day on his way to work.  Since Lucy has no
family, her boss (Jason Bernard) convinces her to work on Christmas
Day.  On that day, she sees Peter mugged and pushed onto the train
tracks.  She quickly acts to pull him from the tracks, but he ends up
in a coma.  At the hospital, a series of misunderstandings results in
Peter's family believing that she is actually his fiance.  Lucy quickly
is accepted as a part of the family and eventually she finds herself
falling for Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman).
     The biggest strength of the screenplay by first-time writers
Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow is its very clear understanding of
the emotions that go with loneliness.  Lucy is portrayed as a
good-hearted but shy individual who is longing for people to share her
life.  She is an only child who's mother had passed away when she was
young.  For many years her father had been her only family and he too
had recently passed away.  This movie is as much about Lucy's strong
attraction to the love and support provided by Peter's close-knit
family as it is about the unusual romantic triangle.
     Sullivan and Lebow show a great deal of perceptiveness about the
support system that a close family can provide.  Lucy's loneliness
clearly goes beyond a simple need for companionship.  Like most people,
she has the everyday need for the support that comes from being a part
of a group.  This is most strongly reflected in the film's best scene,
a very simple moment where Lucy has joined Peter's family around the
dinner table.  The family is engaging in familiar chatter and Lucy's
facial expression very clearly shows how special this everyday event
seems to her.
     The film's portrayal of this kind of loneliness really struck a
chord with me.  I come from a very close-knit family.  While they are
still alive and I have stayed in contact with them as much as possible,
in the last couple years we have spread to different parts of the
country.  I miss the constant support of having my family nearby and
was able to easily relate to Lucy's feelings of isolation.  For me,
some of the most satisfying movies are the ones where a character
experiences strong feelings that match ones I have had.  This
connection made the film really work for me.
     A great deal the film's success can be attributed to the fortunate
casting of Sandra Bullock as Lucy.  Bullock is an actor who generates
an instant, strong sense of likability.  She is able to convey a mix of
strength and vulnerability that is absolutely perfect for Lucy.  She
comes off like a completely real person without ever seeming like an
actor playing a role.  Bullock made a strong impression with terrific
supporting roles in SPEED, DEMOLITION MAN, and WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, but she shows here that she can easily carry a film.  This
movie should make her into a major star.
     Wisely, Peter's family is kept relatively small and is never
portrayed as excessively quirky.  The film could have easily become
bogged-down if the family had consisted of too many colorful
characters.  Instead, they seem like a normal family.  Peter Boyle is
terrific as the family patriarch (affectionately referred to as "Ox" in
the film) with Glynis Johns and Micole Mercurio also good as the
grandmother and mother.  The film doesn't spend an excessive amount of
time developing the family members (it wisely concentrates most of the
attention on Lucy), but it gives them all just enough time to seem like
real people.
     Of course, the film's unusual romantic triangle is also central to
the story.  It too is played well.  All my life, I have had a constant
struggle to overcome a powerful shyness that has made it extremely
difficult to get to know people, particularly impeding romantic
relationships.  Lucy's fantasy crush on Peter rung very familiar to
me.  Sullivan and Lebow treat her crush as very natural and the slow
replacement of her fantasy image of him with his real personality is
handled well.
     The relationship with Jack is also portrayed well.  Bullock and
Pullman have plenty of chemistry and it seems that they genuinely like
one another.  It is particularly refreshing that the film never
overcomplicates their relationship by forcing any long sequences of
animosity between them.  Instead, the relationship is allowed to build
in a low-key manner keeping the main source of conflict Lucy's claim
that she is Peter's fiance (and Jack's cautious suspicion).
     It would have been very easy for the film to be derailed by its
own premise. After all, a deception is the basis of the story.  The
reasons given for Lucy maintaining the deception are convincing.  We
are able to believe that both Lucy >and

     One of the wisest moves was the introduction of Saul (Jack
Warden), a family friend who quickly finds out the truth.  His
character provides Lucy with a confidant who knows the family and
understands why they need to believe that she is Peter's fiance.  I
suppose that the film does stretch credibility a bit to establish these
reasons, but it never seems to go too far.
     When Peter eventually wakes up, the film takes some interesting
directions with his character as well.  Once again, some stretches of
credibility are needed to keep the film from ending right there, but it
is so deftly played that it remains convincing.  His reactions to the
situation are not nearly as predictable as they could have been.
     As good as the film is, it has a few weak points.  It includes a
few supporting characters that are not as effective as they should be.
For some reason, Sullivan and Lebow selected to have several scenes
where Lucy confides in her boss about the situation.  It is a bit hard
to buy such an employee/boss relationship (particularly in an unskilled
profession). His character doesn't seem to serve any purpose that
couldn't have been fulfilled by Saul.
     Another unnecessary character is Joe Jr. (Michael Rispoli), Lucy's
slovenly neighbor.  Rispoli brings a surprising amount of charm to a
stereotyped character, but he didn't entirely seem to fit with the rest
of the film.  The writers also gave Peter a real girlfriend (Ally
Walker) who is played much too far over-the-top.  A final "twist"
involving her character is neither surprising or particularly
interesting.
     It is a bit difficult to accurately convey the tone of the film in
writing.  Some of my comments might make the film seem a bit
depressing, but that really isn't the case.  The film contains a great
deal of humor and is generally played with a light and breezy tone.
The general subject matter and some of the more serious themes does give
the film a bit of a dark side, but it isn't overwhelmed by it.  The
movie is more of a drama then some people might be expecting (I have
seen some reviews where the reviewer was obviously expecting a
screwball comedy), but it certainly isn't overly downbeat.
     Director Jon Turteltaub previously made COOL RUNNINGS into a much
better film than the script should have allowed and he does a terrific
job with this much stronger material.  The pacing is good and he finds
just the right mix between comedy and drama.  Even the few sequences of
physical comedy are staged well.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a film that struck some personal chords
with me and my response is certainly affected by that.  Still, I
suspect that most people will find it to be a terrific romantic comedy
that manages to touch on some interesting themes and some deep
emotions.  I recommend it very highly.

Title
Review for Radioland Murders (1994)
     Despite his immense popularity and acclaim, George Lucas has never
been a particularly prolific filmmaker.  His projects often seem to
remain in various stages of development for many years.  Once they do
go before the cameras, he puts a lot of love and care into the films
usually paying an exceptional amount of attention to detail.  Still,
his films don't always seem to work.  At his best, he creates films
like AMERICAN GRAFITTI and the STAR WARS and Indiana Jones trilogies.
Other times, he can end up making a MORE AMERICAN GRAFITTI or even a
HOWARD THE DUCK.  The slow rate with which Lucas makes films and the
incredible care that go into them always make these failures feel
particularly disappointing.  Unfortunately, RADIOLAND MURDERS, Lucas'
first film in 5 years, joins this group of carefully crafted, lovingly
created disappointments.
     The film is a frantically paced farce set in 1929 during the
premiere broadcast of a brand new Chicago-based radio network.  The
standard opening night problems are largely overshadowed by a series of
mysterious murders that keep occurring during the broadcast. Penny
Henderson (Mary Stuart Masterson), the network's "general secretary",
desperately struggles to keep the broadcast going while her estranged
husband Roger (Brian Benben), the network's head writer, searches for
the real killer after becoming the prime suspect.  This plot is
virtually lost in a constant barrage of sight gags and breathlessly
delivered one-liners.
     Lucas first expressed his intention to eventually make this film
shortly after making AMERICAN GRAFITTI in the early 1970s.  The film
has occasionally appeared on Universal and Lucasfilm's production
schedule many times over those years.  The script is credited to
GRAFITTI authors Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz (who also worked with
Lucas on INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM and HOWARD THE DUCK)
along with TV writers Jeff Reno and Ron Osborn.  The story is credited
to Lucas himself.  The result was a script that tries to do *far* too
much in too little time.  It seems like all of these writers
contributed a whole bunch of ideas and gags, all of which were left
in.
     The potentially interesting plot and characters seem to be
entirely lost in the shuffle.  Since the gags aren't involving
characters that we care (or even *know*) anything about or a plot that
is particularly well developed, there is very little about it that is
actually funny.  The murder mystery aspect is also ineffective since we
never learn anything about the killer's motivations until the standard
confession that comes *after* we learn the identity.  It is hard to
care about a mystery when you can't even think of who might be a
suspect.  When we do learn the killer's motivations, it is easy to see
that there were some interesting ideas at the core of Lucas' story, but
that they seemed to be lost somewhere along the way.  Even after the
killer's identity is revealed, the film goes on to an elaborate action
climax that starts off somewhat cliched but eventually turns downright
weird and inexplicable.
     The movie also has some major problems with pacing.  For farce to
really work, the troubles need to slowly escalate over the course of
the story.  This movie maintains a breakneck pace from the very first
scene, never slowing down.  The movie is played like a series of
punchlines without any setups.  Slapstick always works best if it comes
suddenly and as something of a surprise.  Someone being knocked over by
a swinging door can be funny if it is unexpected.  It quickly ceases to
be funny when pretty much every character is *repeatedly* knocked over
by every door they encounter.  Director Mel Smith sticks almost
entirely to *very* brief takes with constant cuts.  The result is often
confusing with most of the gags off-screen before they even have a
chance to register.
     The cast includes many fine comedic actors, but most are given
absolutely nothing to do.  Such varied performers as Christopher Lloyd,
Michael McKean, George Burns, Ned Beatty, Jeffrey Tambor, Rosemary
Clooney and Anita Morris (in her final film role) drift through various
scenes without ever really doing much.  The actors playing the radio
network's writing staff include talented comic actors Harvey Korman,
Robert Klein, and Peter MacNichol, but none of them are even given much
in the way of dialog.  Only Bobcat Goldthwait is given much screen time
in this group and he does generate a few laughs even though he is
strictly playing his standard character.
     Masterson and Benben do the very best they can given the limited
opportunities.  Benben is essentially playing a variation on his
character from the HBO sitcom "Dream On", but he does manage to be
likable and convincing.  Even better is Masterson who manages to
maintain a strong aire of dignity throughout all of this.  In a few
scenes, we actually see some interesting chemistry between Masterson
and Benben and it is a shame that the film doesn't spend more time on
their relationship.  The movie resolves the main conflict in their
relationship far too early, eventually resulting in the two characters
snapping at each other for no apparent reason.
     Easily the best performance in the film is given by Michael Lerner
as the police detective who is investigating the murders.  He
constantly rises above the material to create the one character that
seems to actually have a little bit of depth.  He is often playing the
straight man here, but that allows him to stay out of the way of some
of the insanity.
     As is expected in a George Lucas movie, the technical aspects of
this film are very strong.  The film was reportedly made on a very low
budget, but it looks much more expensive.  There are a couple of
elaborate action sequences (mostly involving Benben climbing around
outside the studios) that are very convincing and inventively
photographed (mainly thanks to the folks at ILM). Like all of Lucas'
movies, this one is handsomely photographed in scope.
     The film also does a very good job at creating an appropriate
period look and feel.  The sets, costumes, production design, and Joel
McNeely's music all seem to fit in perfectly.  A little suspension of
disbelief is required to get past the fact that some of the programs
shown seem a little overly visual for radio, but that is pretty easily
accepted because they are being performed for a live audience.  I wish
they film would have spent more time showing the actual radio
broadcasts.  These created most of the film's most enjoyable moments.
     It is probably appropriate to comment a little bit about the
audience's reaction to the movie.  Much to my surprise, the other
people in the audience seemed to be laughing a lot more than I was.  At
times, other people in the theater were rather loudly laughing at
points when I didn't notice that anything was particularly funny.  I
don't know if I am starting to become somewhat over-critical or if it
was simply a case of comedy being highly subjective, but the rest of
the audience did seem to enjoy the movie a lot more than I did.
     I went into this movie *really* wanting to like it as I am a huge
George Lucas fan and the subject matter and cast are all very appealing
to me.  Unfortunately, it just didn't work for me and I was left
extrmely disappointed.

Title
Review for Pocahontas (1995)
     In order to avoid the crowds of young children, I have long had a
policy of seeing Disney's new animated features at the latest possible
opening-night showing.  Since these showings are well past bedtime for
most children, the audience is primarily made up of adults.  Attending
these showings has helped to underscore a recent, general change in the
audience for these films.  When I saw BEAUTY AND THE BEAST at the late
showing, there were fewer than ten people in the theater.  For
POCAHONTAS, the show was nearly sold-out.
     While Disney's animated features have always been well-suited for
children, each of their recent efforts (primarily going back to THE
LITTLE MERMAID) have increasingly been directed at a much wider
audience.  Each new film has had a greater maturity and an increased
willingness to introduce serious themes that will be best appreciated
by the adults in the audience.  POCAHONTAS is by far Disney's most
serious and dramatic animated feature to date.  It is also one of their
best.
     Prior to the release of POCAHONTAS (and even after it, to an
extent) there has been a great deal of controversy surrounding the fact
that this is Disney's first animated portrayal of an event from
American history.  Historians questioned whether or not Disney would
treat the subject with respect.  They didn't need to worry.  The film
features some of the most vividly believable human characters ever
portrayed through animation and a powerfully dramatic and well-balanced
storyline.  The movie does not make the Indians into unrealistic saints
or the British into unredeemable villains.  Instead, it portrays them
all as human beings and explores their very real prejudices and fear of
the unknown.
     Admittedly, the film certainly isn't a very accurate portrayal of
history, but it is a bit hard to tell what *is* true with the story of
Pocahontas. About the only thing that historians agree on about the
Pocahontas story is that nobody knows what really happened.  On one
hand, many historians argue that Pocahontas probably was much younger
when she met John Smith than she is portrayed in the film.  On the
other hand, many other historians cite evidence that suggest that the
two may never have met *at all*.  In the long run, the story has become
more legend than reality (and Disney has always used the word "legend"
when discussing this film).  Disney was probably correct to simply do
whatever worked best dramatically.  Most importantly, the film remains
very true to the *spirit* of the story.
     While the characters are very human, they clearly are living in
the same fantasy universe where all Disney animated features take
place.  It is a world where magic really exists and where animals have
real personalities (wisely, though, the animal characters do not talk
in this film).  This doesn't seem to be an inappropriate setting for
telling the legend of POCAHONTAS. The fantasy elements of the film are
clearly derived from the spirituality and deep love for the natural
world that are very much a part of American Indian culture.
     Even though they are animated, it is obvious from the very first
scenes of this film that the human characters are not just cartoons.
We first meet the British sailors as they are saying farewell to their
loved ones before embarking on the journey to America.  In these few
brief shots, we are able to immediately see them as real people with
lives that go beyond the story being told in the film.
     Disney's system of assigning teams of animators to specific
characters really paid off here.  By having small groups of animators
concentrate all of their effort on just one character, they are able to
create very distinctive personalities.  In particular, the characters
in this film feature very natural and *consistent* facial expressions
and body language.  The audience can read a great deal of emotion
simply by watching the faces, much as you can with talented live-action
actors.  The American Indian characters are animated with a somewhat
angular style that may take a little getting used to for viewers more
familiar with the traditionally more rounded look of Disney's human
characters.  This style helps to make the characters very distinctive
and to provide an appropriate ethnicity.
     The voice actors are also all very well matched to the characters'
personalities.  The animators take advantage of the expressiveness of
the actors' voices and appropriately match it with body language.
American Indian actors provide the speaking voices for all of the
American Indian characters, lending a certain authenticity.  Irene
Bedard as Pocahontas and Russell Means as Powhatan are particularly
good.  As John Smith, Mel Gibson's voice is recognizable but not
distracting.  The animators obviously studied Gibson as he is
occasionally recognizable in Smith's facial expressions.  Among the
other British characters, David Ogden Stiers is particularly notable in
that he plays *two* characters providing both with very distinctive
voices.
     While all of the human characters in the film are well-realized,
Pocahontas and John Smith provide the core of the story.  Both are
among the finest characters that Disney has ever created.  The first
thing that is noticed about Pocahontas is how strikingly beautiful she
is, but soon her imagination, intelligence and inner strength capture
the majority of our attention.  The character shares the sense of
wonder and vivid imagination of other Disney heroines, but there is an
overall complexity to the character that they have rarely achieved
before.
     Smith is also quite complex.  He is the character that grows and
changes the most over the course of the film, but it isn't a radical or
unnatural change.  His reputation as an expert "savage hunter" is
presented from the beginning, but it doesn't take long to learn that
there is much more to him than this.  He has the spirit of an explorer
with an active passion for discovery.  Smith and Pocahontas really do
seem to connect in the film.  It seems a bit odd to talk about
chemistry between two drawn characters, but the word does apply.
     Beyond the two leads, the film manages to remain focused on a
small, easily managed group of characters.  Of the Englishman, we
primarily become acquainted with two supporting characters.  Governor
Ratcliffe is the leader of the expedition and the film's main human
villain.  Thomas is a young sailor who is torn between loyalty to Smith
and his duty to Ratcliffe.  Of the Indians, there are three main
supporting characters.  Powhatan is the chief of the tribe and
Pocahontas' father.  Kocoum is a powerful warrior who is Powhatan's
choice for Pocahontas to marry and who represents a possible "safe"
path for Pocahontas' life to take. Finally, Nakoma is Pocahontas' best
friend and confidant.
     None of these supporting characters are allowed to overwhelm the
central story of Pocahontas and John Smith, but instead they are truly
allowed to *support* that story.  The central theme of this film is the
dangers of ignorance and prejudice and each of these characters help to
provide characters that demonstrate those emotions.  Late in the film,
the prejudices and concerns of these characters spark a powerful
incident that leads to the film's climax.  The final twenty minutes or
so of the film are among the most serious and intense events ever
portrayed in a Disney film.
     Some may complain that Ratcliffe is a relatively weak villain for
a Disney film, where the villains are often the most interesting
characters.  In truth, Ratcliffe is *not* the main villain in this
film.  The real villains  are the much more abstract concepts mentioned
above.  Ratcliffe simply serves as a personification of ignorance.  In
addition, Ratcliffe's overwhelming greed (a desire to find gold
consistently remains his main motivation) prevents him from ever
opening his eyes to the reality of the situation.  Still, even the more
sympathetic characters, including, at first, both Pocahontas and John
Smith, are required to overcome their ignorance.
     One of the most unusual devices used in this film is to give
Pocahontas a spirit mentor who takes the form of a talking tree, voiced
by Linda Hunt with a great deal of wit.  Grandmother Willow serves as a
conscience and guide for Pocahontas and eventually for John Smith as
well.  She is also used as an ingenious way to dispense with the
language gap between the two main characters.  This is a device that
really can only work in animation, where suspension of disbelief comes
somewhat more easily.  Unfortunately, the film does drop the ball a bit
when the *other* Indian and British characters try to interact.  It is
not entirely clear who can understand whom.
     The general story and themes of this film are quite serious and
the tone of the film reflects that.  That doesn't mean that the movie
does not contain some very welcome comic relief.  The vast majority of
the comedy is provided by the animal characters.  Pocahontas is given a
raccoon named Meeko and a hummingbird named Flit as her constant
companions.  The animals do not speak, but they are given very
distinctive personalities.  A third animal, Ratcliffe's spoiled pet dog
Percy, eventually becomes mixed up with Meeko and Flit as well.  While
these animals frequently bring visual humor to the film, they also are
an active part of the story. Writers Carl Binder, Susannah Grant and
Phillip LaZebnik manage to use the relationship between Meeko and Percy
to draw a parallel to the conflict between the British and the
Indians.
     Like the vast majority of Disney's animated features, POCAHONTAS
is a musical.  The songs by composer Alan Menken and lyricist Stephen
Schwartz are exceptionally well integrated into the film.  Often, the
segue to the songs is so smooth that they actually seem to be a part of
the dialog.  Among Disney's animated musicals, only BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST came close to integrating the music so completely into the
story.  This level of integration may prevent the songs from seeming as
"memorable" since they lose a lot of their meaning taken out of the
context of the film.  It is really most important for the music to
serve the film, though, and this music does that *very* well.
     Several months before the film was released, Disney used the
entire performance of the song "Colors of the Wind" in a trailer.  As a
result, many people had already seen this sequence before the film came
out.  On its own, it was impressive (and probably helped to sell the
film), but it is a bit of a shame that most viewers will not get to
experience it for the first time in its proper context.  In the film,
this song is the point where John Smith's point-of-view truly begins to
change and it is quite powerful despite its familiarity.
     Menken and Schwartz provide a surprisingly hard-hitting song
called "Savages" that leads up to the film's emotional climax.  This is
a very gritty and angry song that is not likely to ever be featured on
Disney's child-oriented "sing along" collections.  Menken and Schwartz
deserve a great deal of credit for being willing to push the envelope
with this song.  Unfortunately, Disney did decide to tone the lyrics
down a bit just prior to the film's release (the original lyrics are
still included on the original pressing of the soundtrack CD).  It is a
shame that Disney was unwilling to let Schwartz's lyrics maintain their
full impact.
     As good as POCAHONTAS is, it still suffers from a problem common
to Disney's recent features.  While they have been willing to deal with
more serious and adult themes in their films, they still refuse to drop
their limits on the running time.  POCAHONTAS is actually only 80
minutes long and it definitely would have benefited from a little
additional time.  The recent Disney films have all rushed the middle
act a bit and that is once again the problem here.  The romance between
Pocahontas and John Smith is not given quite as much attention as it
deserves.
     It has been widely reported that a romantic duet between the two
characters was deleted late in the production (the music from the song
is still incorporated into Menken's background score and a pop version
plays over the end-credits).  It is fairly obvious where the song
*should* have gone and it may have been a mistake to remove it.  The
scene in question is one of the film's more dramatic moments, but it
did leave me feeling that it needed something a bit more.
        POCAHONTAS is yet another triumph from Disney's animation
department and is sure to be on my list of the best films of 1995. It
tells a powerful story that truly touched me emotionally.

Title
Review for Stargate (1994)
     For virtually everyone, there are a few films that fit into the
"guilty pleasure" category.  These are movies that are clearly not very
good, but which you still enjoy against your own better judgement.
STARGATE is just such a film.
     The storyline of this film is completely ludicrous.  The film
opens in the 1920s with the discovery of an unusual artifact in the
Egyptian desert.  It then jumps to the present day where the military
is involved in a scientific analysis of this artifact (the movie never
bothers to explain where the artifact had been for the last 70 years).
They bring in controversial but brilliant Egyptologist Dr. Jackson
(James Spader) who quickly figures out that the artifact is a
"stargate" allowing for instantaneous interstellar travel.  Soon,
Dr. Jackson is going along on a mission led by suicidal Col. O'Neil
(Kurt Russell) to the "other side of the known universe".  On the other
side, they discover a race of enslaved humans being ruled by an alien
posing as the sun god Ra (Jaye Davidson).  In the process, we learn the
"true" origins of the Great Pyramids.
     Obviously, this story sounds pretty ridiculous in print.  It
doesn't make much more sense in the film itself.  In fact, a large part
of the film's entertainment value comes from watching to see how much
more ludicrous the plot can become.  Just when you think the film has
reached a new height of silliness, it manages to come up with some new
ridiculous idea.  As silly as it all is, everyone involved in the film
seems to be taking it completely seriously.  The result probably works
much better than it would have if the filmmakers had acknowledged the
silliness of the plot and tried to play it for laughs.  Some of the fun
here comes from the fact that you will likely be laughing at things
that weren't really meant to be funny.
     Even with an extremely badly written role like he has here, James
Spader still manages to come out of the film with some dignity intact.
In order to indicate that he is an intellectual, but a bit of a dweeb,
Spader is made up to have an almost frightening resemblance to John
Denver.  He is one of those ultra-brilliant movie scientists who can
come in and immediately solve puzzles that other scientists have been
struggling with for years.  He also has outlandish theories that can
clear a conference room in a moment but which, of course, must turn out
to be completely true.  Spader is asked to give bizarre speeches
containing all kinds of technological buzzwords, do lots of bumbling
stunts (including being dragged across the desert by a strange alien
pack animal), translate and occasionally speak extinct Egyptian
dialects, participate in one of the most awkward love stories of recent
memory, and to frequently act indignant at the soldiers' behavior
(thankfully, he is never required to start singing "Rocky Mountain
High").  Despite all this, Spader still remains likable and even comes
close to creating a believable character.
     Russell, on the other hand, is given an incredibly cliched role
and does virtually nothing with it.  Early in the film, we are told
that Russell's character had a son who was accidentally shot. When we get
our first look at Russell, he has a gun to his head preparing to commit
suicide.  With those two little bits of information, you can probably
correctly guess >everything

     Most of the publicity about Jaye Davidson's role in THE CRYING
GAME seemed to revolve around his character's secret, but that largely
ignored the fact that he gave a genuinely powerful and moving
performance in that film.  Unfortunately, his role here indicates that
he may be doomed to stunt casting from now on.  Despite the fact that
he is prominently featured in much of the promotional material for the
film, Davidson doesn't even appear until about ninety minutes into the
movie (which runs just under two hours).  All of his dialogue is
electronically enhanced and is in the film's version of ancient
Egyptian.  The majority of his "performance" is really just posing for
the camera instead of acting.  Hopefully, somebody will eventually find
Davidson another role with some depth, but this movie certainly isn't
it.
     Obviously, the storyline here does not live up to any kind of
close scrutiny.  If you try to look for logic here, you will likely
never find it. At the top of the list of implausibilities is Spader's
incredible ability to instantly read, speak, and understand ancient
Egyptian dialects, even if he has never encountered them before.  I
guess that it is somewhat courageous of the filmmakers not to have all
the aliens speak English, but they still take the easy way out by
allowing Spader to become a human "universal translator".  Another
major implausibility is the fact that the civilization on the other
planet seems to be technically way ahead of Earth, but that the humans
on the other side of the stargate do not seem to have evolved one bit
in thousands of years.
     Another major problem with this film is the unfortunate cliches
involved in the portrayal of the military.  Screenwriters Roland
Emmerich (who also directed) and Dean Devlin seem to have based the
soldiers on those from other paranoid science fiction movies.
Particularly during the early scenes, the soldiers seem rather cruel
and heartless, showing virtually no wonderment about their journey.  Of
course, the film eventually ends up turning into a massive shoot-em-up,
but it sure would have been nice if it had taken a more surprising
direction.
     Emmerich's direction of the film is a bit better than his
screen-writing.  The film moves at a very brisk pace and is certainly
never dull.  The whole movie is infused with a misguided but infectious
energy.  It is as if Emmerich realized how ridiculous the story was and
thus felt that it would help to have everyone >really

     The production values of the film are generally quite good.  There
are some really neat looking CGI special effects (particularly the
sequences where the characters travel through the stargate) which are
generally quite convincing.  Karl Walter Lindenlaub's Panavision
photography is also good with some really nice desert vistas.  David
Arnold's music score is not particularly original (it seems to borrow
from a number of other science fiction scores), but it is sufficiently
rousing and effective.  The soundtrack has a lot of bass and makes
extensive use of surround sound, so it is probably best to see the film
in a theater with the best possible sound system.
     STARGATE certainly is not a very good film, but it is generally an
enjoyable one.  Much of the enjoyment comes from laughing at the film's
ineptitude, a fact that likely would not please the filmmakers, but
that doesn't change the fact that the movie will provide a generally
good time.

Title
Review for While You Were Sleeping (1995)
     The romantic comedy is a mainstay of popular entertainment,
existing in theater and literature that predated the movies.  As other
genres have come in and out of favor in Hollywood, filmmakers have
continued to regularly produce new romantic comedies.  While the
characters and situations change, the basic form has remained
remarkably consistent.
     The genre's best entries are those that follow believable
characters through interesting situations leading to romance.  The best
romantic comedies strike a delicate balance between complicated
situations that border on fantasy and believable characters that seem
like real people.  The specifics of the situations portrayed may seem
unlikely, but it is important that the audience be able to relate to
the characters.  We need to believe that these could be real people
that we know--or even that they are much like ourselves.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a very strong and smart romantic
comedy.  It starts from an outlandish premise, but it features central
characters with such realistic behavior and emotions that we are able
to completely accept everything that happens.  The result is a very
appealing film with some surprising depth of emotion.
     Sandra Bullock stars as Lucy Moderatz, a lonely tollbooth
attendant for the Chicago Transit Authority.  She secretly pines for
Peter Callaghan (Peter Gallagher), a handsome stranger who wordlessly
passes by her booth every day on his way to work.  Since Lucy has no
family, her boss (Jason Bernard) convinces her to work on Christmas
Day.  On that day, she sees Peter mugged and pushed onto the train
tracks.  She quickly acts to pull him from the tracks, but he ends up
in a coma.  At the hospital, a series of misunderstandings results in
Peter's family believing that she is actually his fiance.  Lucy quickly
is accepted as a part of the family and eventually she finds herself
falling for Peter's brother Jack (Bill Pullman).
     The biggest strength of the screenplay by first-time writers
Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow is its very clear understanding of
the emotions that go with loneliness.  Lucy is portrayed as a
good-hearted but shy individual who is longing for people to share her
life.  She is an only child who's mother had passed away when she was
young.  For many years her father had been her only family and he too
had recently passed away.  This movie is as much about Lucy's strong
attraction to the love and support provided by Peter's close-knit
family as it is about the unusual romantic triangle.
     Sullivan and Lebow show a great deal of perceptiveness about the
support system that a close family can provide.  Lucy's loneliness
clearly goes beyond a simple need for companionship.  Like most people,
she has the everyday need for the support that comes from being a part
of a group.  This is most strongly reflected in the film's best scene,
a very simple moment where Lucy has joined Peter's family around the
dinner table.  The family is engaging in familiar chatter and Lucy's
facial expression very clearly shows how special this everyday event
seems to her.
     The film's portrayal of this kind of loneliness really struck a
chord with me.  I come from a very close-knit family.  While they are
still alive and I have stayed in contact with them as much as possible,
in the last couple years we have spread to different parts of the
country.  I miss the constant support of having my family nearby and
was able to easily relate to Lucy's feelings of isolation.  For me,
some of the most satisfying movies are the ones where a character
experiences strong feelings that match ones I have had.  This
connection made the film really work for me.
     A great deal the film's success can be attributed to the fortunate
casting of Sandra Bullock as Lucy.  Bullock is an actor who generates
an instant, strong sense of likability.  She is able to convey a mix of
strength and vulnerability that is absolutely perfect for Lucy.  She
comes off like a completely real person without ever seeming like an
actor playing a role.  Bullock made a strong impression with terrific
supporting roles in SPEED, DEMOLITION MAN, and WRESTLING ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, but she shows here that she can easily carry a film.  This
movie should make her into a major star.
     Wisely, Peter's family is kept relatively small and is never
portrayed as excessively quirky.  The film could have easily become
bogged-down if the family had consisted of too many colorful
characters.  Instead, they seem like a normal family.  Peter Boyle is
terrific as the family patriarch (affectionately referred to as "Ox" in
the film) with Glynis Johns and Micole Mercurio also good as the
grandmother and mother.  The film doesn't spend an excessive amount of
time developing the family members (it wisely concentrates most of the
attention on Lucy), but it gives them all just enough time to seem like
real people.
     Of course, the film's unusual romantic triangle is also central to
the story.  It too is played well.  All my life, I have had a constant
struggle to overcome a powerful shyness that has made it extremely
difficult to get to know people, particularly impeding romantic
relationships.  Lucy's fantasy crush on Peter rung very familiar to
me.  Sullivan and Lebow treat her crush as very natural and the slow
replacement of her fantasy image of him with his real personality is
handled well.
     The relationship with Jack is also portrayed well.  Bullock and
Pullman have plenty of chemistry and it seems that they genuinely like
one another.  It is particularly refreshing that the film never
overcomplicates their relationship by forcing any long sequences of
animosity between them.  Instead, the relationship is allowed to build
in a low-key manner keeping the main source of conflict Lucy's claim
that she is Peter's fiance (and Jack's cautious suspicion).
     It would have been very easy for the film to be derailed by its
own premise. After all, a deception is the basis of the story.  The
reasons given for Lucy maintaining the deception are convincing.  We
are able to believe that both Lucy >and

     One of the wisest moves was the introduction of Saul (Jack
Warden), a family friend who quickly finds out the truth.  His
character provides Lucy with a confidant who knows the family and
understands why they need to believe that she is Peter's fiance.  I
suppose that the film does stretch credibility a bit to establish these
reasons, but it never seems to go too far.
     When Peter eventually wakes up, the film takes some interesting
directions with his character as well.  Once again, some stretches of
credibility are needed to keep the film from ending right there, but it
is so deftly played that it remains convincing.  His reactions to the
situation are not nearly as predictable as they could have been.
     As good as the film is, it has a few weak points.  It includes a
few supporting characters that are not as effective as they should be.
For some reason, Sullivan and Lebow selected to have several scenes
where Lucy confides in her boss about the situation.  It is a bit hard
to buy such an employee/boss relationship (particularly in an unskilled
profession). His character doesn't seem to serve any purpose that
couldn't have been fulfilled by Saul.
     Another unnecessary character is Joe Jr. (Michael Rispoli), Lucy's
slovenly neighbor.  Rispoli brings a surprising amount of charm to a
stereotyped character, but he didn't entirely seem to fit with the rest
of the film.  The writers also gave Peter a real girlfriend (Ally
Walker) who is played much too far over-the-top.  A final "twist"
involving her character is neither surprising or particularly
interesting.
     It is a bit difficult to accurately convey the tone of the film in
writing.  Some of my comments might make the film seem a bit
depressing, but that really isn't the case.  The film contains a great
deal of humor and is generally played with a light and breezy tone.
The general subject matter and some of the more serious themes does give
the film a bit of a dark side, but it isn't overwhelmed by it.  The
movie is more of a drama then some people might be expecting (I have
seen some reviews where the reviewer was obviously expecting a
screwball comedy), but it certainly isn't overly downbeat.
     Director Jon Turteltaub previously made COOL RUNNINGS into a much
better film than the script should have allowed and he does a terrific
job with this much stronger material.  The pacing is good and he finds
just the right mix between comedy and drama.  Even the few sequences of
physical comedy are staged well.
     WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is a film that struck some personal chords
with me and my response is certainly affected by that.  Still, I
suspect that most people will find it to be a terrific romantic comedy
that manages to touch on some interesting themes and some deep
emotions.  I recommend it very highly.

Title
Review for Heavenly Creatures (1994)
     Two of the most common and popular themes explored in the movies
are the importance of friendship and the power of the imagination.
These subjects are usually explored in movies that are considered to be
the most uplifting.  Peter Jackson's psychological drama HEAVENLY
CREATURES explores these same themes, but finds a dark and disturbing
side to them.  The result is one of the most fascinating and provocative
films of 1994.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES tells the true story of a close friendship that
develops between two 14-year-old girls.  It is a friendship that
eventually turns tragic when the girls almost inexplicably are driven
to commit a horrible crime.  Jackson and his co-screenwriter Frances
Walsh vividly recreate this friendship providing a glimpse into the
complex psychology that eventually leads to tragedy.
     The film opens as a British girl named Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet)
arrives in New Zealand where her father has just taken a position as a
professor at an area university.  Juliet is enrolled in the same school
attended by Pauline Parker (Melanie Lynskey), an extremely introverted
girl with few friends.  Juliet and Pauline quickly develop a strong
connection that leads to an intensely close friendship.  Each girl
possesses a vivid imagination and they attempt to escape from the
pressures of adolescence by creating an elaborate fantasy world.
     Jackson helps us to get more deeply into the minds of Juliet and
Pauline through a number of methods.  The most traditional is to allow
Lynskey to narrate the film using actual excerpts from Pauline's
diary.  It is very fortunate that these diaries exist as they provide
many insights into the friendship and what it meant to Pauline.  This
narration lends an aire of credibility to the film that would have been
severely lacking without it.  The narration is used sparingly enough
that it never seems like a crutch being used to avoid more natural
character development.
     A more unorthodox method used to help us learn more about these
characters is the *visual* portrayal of the fantasy world created by
the girls.  Juliet and Pauline created clay figurines to represent the
various characters inside their fantasy world and Jackson uses
state-of-the-art special effects to vividly bring these figurines to
life.  Through these fantasy sequences, we begin to see the first signs
of trouble as the girls begin to mentally intertwine romance with
violence.  These sequences are convincing but appropriately subtle,
allowing the special effects to always remain a tool used in service of
the story instead of the other way around.
     The most significant question raised by the film is whether or not
the final tragedy was a result of an unnaturally close friendship or
was largely a result of outside influences.  The film suggests that
tragedy might have been averted had the girls' friendship been
permitted to develop in a natural manner.
     Both of the girls had suffered from illnesses earlier in their
lives which  colored their view of the world before they even met.  In
an early scene, Juliet expresses a romantic view of the illnesses,
providing another indication of the girls mixing romance with the
negative.  We also learn that Juliet had felt abandoned as she was
often sent away from her family "for the good of her health."  During
the time frame shown in the movie, Juliet is bedridden for a while when
she contracts tuberculosis.  During this illness, Pauline and Juliete
are only able to communicate via letters.  It is through these letters
that they create the most vivid details of their fantasy world.
     The girls share a feeling of alienation from adults, particularly
their own parents.  The parents become concerned about the closeness of
the girls' friendship and make some efforts to weaken it.  There are
also several scenes in which parents or teachers are shown attempting
to stifle the strong creativity that is a major part of both Juliet and
Pauline's personalities.  At one point, Pauline's parents suggest that
her interest in writing is inappropriate and there are also several
scenes in which they are scolded by teachers for being creative instead
of precisely following instructions outlined in the lessons.  This
mistrust of adults in their lives is also manifested as they create
their own adult role models by including various celebrities in their
fantasy world.  Their images of such idols as tenor Mario Lanzer and
actors like James Mason and Orson Welles become their heroes.
     The film addresses the parents' concern that Juliet and Pauline's
relationship might be homosexual in nature.  The film is set in the
early 1950s and this idea is so horrifying to the adults that they
could barely even say the word.  The movie does not completely rule out
the possibility that the relationship *was* homosexual, but it doesn't
fully embrace the idea either.  Instead, Jackson and Walsh portray the
girls as sufficiently unsophisticated when it comes to sexuality that
they really would never be able to recognize a sexual component to
their relationship if it existed.
     In the end, the film leaves the viewer with the thought that the
constant meddling into the friendship might have been a major cause of
the tragedy.  Each girl felt that the other was the only person who had
ever given them the support and love that they needed.  As they see
threats to their friendship and are confronted with the danger of
separation, they eventually reach a point where they come up with a
horrifying solution.
     Much of the success of this film is dependent on the performances
by Lynskey and Winslet.  Both are relatively inexperienced actors
making their feature film debuts (both are given "and introducing"
credits on this film.)  They are both perfectly cast and give
tremendously affecting and realistic performances.
     As Juliet, Winslet creates a character that is bright and bubbly
on the outside, but who also clearly has a dark side that sits right
below the surface.  Even when she is being completely polite and
friendly, it can seem like her thoughts are far more sinister.  Only
when she is with Pauline does she seem completely and sincerely happy.
Lynskey externally appears cold and unhappy.  When she feels crossed,
she shows an angry sneer that seems to go all the way down to her
soul.  When she is with Juliet, though, her entire appearance appears
to brighten into an embodiment of happiness.
     Among the most important accomplishments of Lynskey and Winslet's
performances is to fully grab the audience's sympathy.  The film allows
us to truly come to *like* these girls and to desire to see their
friendship survive.  Their final tragic action is all the more
disturbing for this reason.  In some ways, we almost feel like we can
*understand* their motivations.  That makes the ending seem truly
upsetting.
     In addition to Lynsley and Winslet, the other major discovery of
this film is director Peter Jackson.  He manages to find exactly the
right tone and style for this movie.  The best example of Jackson's
expert direction are  breathtaking early scenes showing the development
of Juliet and Pauline's relationship through frantic sequences of play
all wonderfully scored with recordings by their idol Mario Lanza.
Prior to this film, Jackson had some experience as a horror movie
director which probably helped to prepare him for the seamless
incorporation of the fantasy sequences in this film.  Finally, the
widescreen photography by Alun Bollinger is frequently creative but is
never distracting.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a fascinating psychological study that leaves
the viewer with a great deal to think about.  It is a film that is not
easily forgotten after you leave the theater.  The film is also
important as an introduction to two major new acting talents and as
proof of the talent of an important director.  It is an incredible
film.

Title
Review for Casper (1995)
     Universal/Amblin's new live-action version of CASPER is
considerably more entertaining than it has any right to be.  While the
film suffers from a nearly incoherent story, it does contain some
clever ideas, a lot of laughs, eye-popping visuals, and appealing
performances by Christina Ricci and Bill Pullman.
     From the beginning, a live-action film based on the "Casper
the Friendly Ghost" cartoon series and comic books seems like a strange
idea.  While film adaptations of older TV series are popular right now,
CASPER doesn't immediately generate the strong feelings of positive
nostalgia that helped projects like THE FLINTSTONES or THE ADDAMS
FAMILY.  The project is further hampered by the fact that there just
isn't all that much to the source material.  It is an awfully thin
basis for a full-length movie.
     Surprisingly, though, the filmmakers almost pull it off.  I
suspect that the visual-effects potential is a large part of what
attracted Amblin to this project.  Many members of the Industrial Light
and Magic team that worked on JURASSIC PARK, including supervisors
Dennis Muren and Michael Lantieri, also work on CASPER.  The illusion
created for the ghosts is so believable that it seems absolutely
effortless.  After the initial "wow" factor wore off, I found that I
stopped even thinking about the fact that they *were* special effects.
I was completely caught up by the illusion.
     Some may object to the fact that the design of the ghosts is
essentially the same as the cartoon series.  At first the cartoon-like
designs are a bit jarring in a live-action film, but I quickly grew
used to it.  In the long run, I think the familiarity of the design
serves the film well.  A large part of the success of the visuals comes
from the fact that the ghosts seamlessly interact with the human
characters and live-action props (using many of the techniques
pioneered in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT).  This interaction helps the
audience to easily lose the impression of watching cartoon characters.
     While the film is fun to watch, the script turns out to be both a
strength and a liability.  Writers Sherri Stoner and Deanna Oliver are
veterans of Amblin's "Tiny Toons Adventures" and "Animaniacs" TV
series.  That background does tend to be reflected in the film, which
sometimes seems like a cartoon short stretched out to nearly two hours.
The movie has some very clever sequences and some very funny dialog and
slapstick.  The plot doesn't really hold together, though.  It seems
like a strung-together collection of scenes rather than a coherent
whole.
     Like many of the recent TV series adaptations, CASPER is seriously
overplotted.  The main plot involves Ms. Carrigan (Cathy Moriarty), a
rich woman who inherits the mansion haunted by Casper and his three
obnoxious cousins.  She believes that there is treasure hidden in the
mansion, but the ghosts keep her from getting close enough to search.
She eventually hires "ghost therapist" Dr. Harvey (Pullman) who moves
into the mansion with his daughter Cat (Ricci).  As Cat befriends
Casper and Dr. Harvey tries to calm the obnoxious cousins, Carrigan and
her associate Dibs (Eric Idle) try to find the treasure.
     This plot is further complicated by several subplots.  Some of
them include Cat planning a school dance to be held at the mansion and
Kat helping Casper to use a resurrection machine originally invented by
his father to bring him back to life.  There are a few too many plots
here and they don't all manage to come together cleanly.  At times,
Stoner and Oliver introduce plot elements that they eventually just
abandon.  The most blatant example is an unclear prank that a couple of
Cat's classmates are trying to engineer.  It was never clear exactly
*what* they had intended.
     Despite this overall incoherence, there are a lot of individual
scenes that really *do* work.  Many of the jokes do manage to find
their mark and the writers wisely include a fair share of jokes aimed
at the adults in the audience.  They even manage a few clever and
unpredictable twists that are quite welcome.  The final fate of
Moriarty's character is particularly unexpected.
     The film does attempt to explore a few serious themes with some
surprisingly effective results.  There are several scenes where Kat
tries to help Casper to remember what he was like when he was alive.
These are quite well played and really do generate some dramatic
interest.  The film even manages a tasteful scene that explains how
Casper died.  There are also a few well- played scenes involving Dr.
Harvey trying to get past the death of his wife. This eventually leads
to an exceptionally satisfying conclusion late in the film.
     There is one issue that the film conspicuously ignores.  There are
a number of references to the concept that ghosts are spirits that have
been unable to "cross-over" due to unfinished business.  This issue
comes into play several times, but there are never any discussions of
what unfinished business is keeping Casper around.  Certainly,
resolution of that would have hurt the chances for a sequel, but it
should have at least been *discussed*.
     In MERMAIDS and both of the ADDAMS FAMILY films, Christina Ricci
managed to steal virtually every scene she was in.  She gives another
really strong performance here.  She is an extremely likable performer
and she is able to bring a lot even to this kind of cartoonish role.
I'd love to see what she would do with a more complex role.
     Bill Pullman has been a very solid character actor for many years
and he is good here as well.  He isn't given much to do, but he does a
lot with what he is given.  The combination of this film and WHILE YOU
WERE SLEEPING might help to increase his marketability as an actor.
     The rest of the performances are competent, but not particularly
inspired.  Moriarty is playing basically the same role she has played
in numerous other films and is also allowed to go a little too far over
the top here.  Eric Idle isn't given a great deal to do, but he still
manages to be pretty funny.
     First time director Brad Silberling does a competent job and
manages to generally keep the pace up.  As might be expected here, the
direction does seem to favor the visual effects over the acting (as
particularly evidenced in the supporting roles).  James Horner provides
a decent (but not particularly original) musical score.  The film does
make the mistake of never playing a straightforward version of the old
TV series' theme song (a version performed by Little Richard does play
over the end credits).
     By no means is CASPER a great film, but it is certainly a lot
better than it might have been.  The film doesn't make a heck of a lot
of sense, but it a lot of fun and I left the theater with a big smile
on my face.

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
     One of the most unusual aspects of the film industry is the
fondness that some people feel for some of the worst that the industry
has to offer.  That aspect is most vividly demonstrated by the cult
following of the amazingly inept films written and directed by Edward
Wood Jr.  Ironically, director Tim Burton tells Wood's story in one of
the best films of 1994.
     Burton's film, which is simply titled ED WOOD, is centered around
the friendship between Wood (Johnny Depp) and an aging, washed-up Bela
Lugosi (Martin Landau).  The film also follows the making of Wood's
three most legendary films: GLEN OR GLENDA?, BRIDE OF THE MONSTER, and
PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.  In the process, we are introduced to many of
the bizarre individuals who populated Wood's films and his life.  Among
the people we meet are Swedish wrestler Tor Johnson (George "The
Animal" Steele), would-be transsexual Bunny Breckinridge (Bill
Murray), phony psychic Criswell (Jeffrey Jones), and TV horror movie
hostess Vampira (Lisa Marie).
     If these characters had been created for a fictional film, nobody
ever would have believed them.  This movie is mostly non-fiction,
though, and we are therefore more inclined to accept them.
Screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski have wisely written
most of the film as a comedy, recognizing that it is difficult to take
these people too seriously.  This is a *very* funny movie, but the
comedy never seems mean-spirited.  Burton and the writers allow the
humor to build naturally.  A lot of inherent humor comes out of the
image of a cross-dressing film director shooting ineptly conceived
scenes with a bizarre cast of non-actors.  There is no need to
artificially create humor through put-downs and this script is smart
enough to know that.
     At the heart of the film is the surprisingly touching relationship
that builds between Ed Wood and Bela Lugosi.  When Wood meets Lugosi,
he is a bitter, dying old man who is hopelessly addicted to morphine.
He is flattered by the fact that Wood still remembers, and even admires
him.  Lugosi is able to use his faded stardom to provide Wood with a
small link to legitimacy while Wood allows him to live out his final
days as a working actor.  Depp and Landau play very well together and
really make this relationship work.
     Johnny Depp first demonstrated some skill as an actor in Burton's
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and Burton gets another strong performance out of
him here.  Some may feel that Depp goes over the top a bit with this
performance, but how else could Ed Wood be played?  Depp plays Wood as
a man who is totally committed to his art, while also being mostly
unaware of his lack of talent. The script places quite a bit of
emphasis on Wood's admiration for Orson Welles.  In his own strange
way, Wood is simply emulating his idol.  Depp's performance
successfully captures the dedication that separates Wood's films from
most other bad movies.  It is hard not to feel some affection towards
his films simply because of their utter *sincerity*.  When Wood shouts
"Cut! That was *perfect*!" at the end of every lousy take, you truly
believe that he means it.
     Martin Landau's performance as Bela Lugosi is so right on the mark
that the Academy should go ahead and engrave his name on the Best
Supporting Actor award statue now.  Landau manages to sound, behave,
and even look (with a little help from Rick Baker's makeup effects)
like the real Lugosi.  His performance is much more than just an
impersonation, though.  He plays Lugosi as a sad, proud man who simply
wants to get back into the limelight that he once knew. It is an
outstanding performance.
     Wood is not portrayed as a saint, by any means.  He is willing to
do whatever it takes to get his films made.  He is very quick to agree
to casting people in his films if they are willing to put up money.
His GLEN OR GLENDA? co-star and girlfriend Dolores Fuller (Sarah
Jessica Parker) eventually leaves him after she is replaced for the
lead role in BRIDE OF THE MONSTER by another actress who helps with
financing.  Her willingness to still appear in a tiny role in the film
shows the unusual loyalty that Wood inspired, though.
     The film is full of other strong supporting performances.  Each of
the actors playing the members of Wood's regular acting company are
very convincing.  Bill Murray is the most familiar face in the cast and
it is sometimes a bit difficult to see Bunny Breckinridge instead of
Bill Murray, but he is still very appealing and generates a lot of
laughs.  Parker believably portrays Fuller's uncertain loyalties and
Patricia Arquette does her best in a rather thankless role as the
future Mrs. Ed Wood.
     Like all of Tim Burton's films, the production design and style
plays a very major role in ED WOOD.  Burton selected to shoot this film
in black and white and lights the movie to largely match the look of Ed
Wood's own films. Howard Shore's score also does a nice job of
duplicating the music commonly used in that era, although there were a
few occasions where it sounded a bit like Shore was borrowing the style
of Burton's usual collaborator Danny Elfman.
     ED WOOD is a loving tribute to one of the strangest filmmakers in
the history of Hollywood.  It is one of the funniest movies in recent
memory, while never letting the laughs get in the way of telling the
story of the unique friendship between Wood and Lugosi.  This is one of
the best films ever made about filmmaking and one of the best movies of
1994.

Title
Review for Disclosure (1994)
     Barry Levinson's big-budget, star-studded film adaptation of
Michael Crichton's novel DISCLOSURE has been promoted as a social drama
that turns the issue of sexual harassment on its side through the use
of a gender reversal.  In reality, the harassment issue really is just
a plot point in a glossy, high-tech thriller about corporate politics.
The resulting film is somewhat short on meaningful social commentary,
but it is still a fast-paced and extremely entertaining crowd pleaser.
     Michael Douglas stars as Tom Sanders, the head of manufacturing
for a fictional computer company called Digicorp.  Sanders is up for a
major promotion but is passed up in favor of Meredith Johnson (Demi
Moore), who coincidentally used to live with Sanders (who is now
happily married with children).  When Sanders turns down Johnson's
attempt at seduction during an after-hours meeting, each accuses the
other of sexual harassment.  The stakes are raised by the high amounts
of money that both Sanders and Johnson stand  to make from a planned
merger between Digicorp and another company.  The merger is in danger
of being derailed if Sanders cannot find a reason for major
manufacturing problems with Digicorp's new high speed computer CD-ROM,
a product that is the major selling point in the merger.
     Of course, the big hook in this story is the gender switch of
having a man being sexually harassed by a female boss.  Even more than
in Crichton's novel, screenwriter Paul Attanasio leaves little
ambiguity about the harassment scene.  The dialog explicitly reminds us
that sexual harassment is really about power instead of about sex and
it is made very clear that Sanders never had any power over Johnson.
The majority of the film is told directly from Sanders' point-of-view
which serves to further underscore the audience's view of him as a
victim.  This lack of ambiguity hammers home the belief that sexual
harassment is likely to originate with either gender, but it doesn't
really explore that view with much depth.
     As with Crichton's novel, this idea is likely going to surround
the film with some controversy.  Some may call the film sexist based
primarily on the negative portrayal of a female executive and on the
simple suggestion that a woman could sexually harass a man.  An attempt
is made to alleviate these accusations by including several strong,
sympathetic women in supporting roles.  As in the novel, Sanders hires
a female attorney (Roma Maffia of the TV series "Chicago Hope") to
represent him in his sexual harassment claim. The film also beefs up
the role of Sanders' wife (Caroline Goodall), keeping her actively
involved in more of the story.  The film also includes a few strong
scenes with other female executives at Digicorp, including one
particularly effective sequence in which one of Sanders' peers asks him
to think about why she wasn't even *considered* as a likely candidate
for the promotion.
     The sexual harassment case is actually dispensed with surprisingly
early in the film, revealing that is was just a small component in a
more complicated story of corporate politics.  The latter half of the
film essentially turns into a high-tech detective story as Sanders
struggles to learn Johnson's true motivations in order to hang on to
his job.  This is actually the most interesting aspect of the film.
Director Barry Levinson keeps this part of the film moving at a very
rapid pace and most of the plot details are revealed in a logical and
believable manner.
     Michael Douglas is good in the role of Tom Sanders, although he
isn't really required to stretch much as an actor.  This role is
essentially another variation on the characters that he played in FATAL
ATTRACTION and BASIC INSTINCT.  Crichton has a bit of a tendency in his
novels to seemingly describe the actor that he is thinking of for the
lead roles.  Reading the novel, it is *very* easy to picture Douglas as
Tom Sanders.
     On the other hand, Demi Moore is probably *not* the first person
that most people would imagine in the role of Meredith Johnson.  Her
past roles have never really showed the ruthless edge that the
character calls for.  Moore shows some surprising versatility in this
role and manages to play the role quite convincingly.  Unfortunately,
Attanasio's script draws the character somewhat two-dimensionally.  In
an effort to streamline the story, the film eliminates a couple
subplots from the novel that served to make Johnson's motivations
clearer.  In the film, she ends up seeming more incompetent while in
the book she seemed much more in control.  The fact that the character
works at all is very much due to the strength of Moore's acting.
     The streamlining of the script also reduces the significance of
Bob Garvin (Donald Sutherland), Digicorp's CEO.  The film constantly
keeps the audience in the dark about his motivations and about how much
he is aware of what is going on.  Sutherland does the best he can, but
the role turns out to be rather thankless.  Some of the other
supporting roles are more interesting.  Particularly strong
performances are given by Roma Maffia as the lawyer, Caroline Goodall
as Sanders' wife, Dennis Miller (in a semi-serious role) and Nicholas
Sadler as techies on Sanders' staff.
     As is usually the case in Michael Crichton's stories, technology
ends up playing a major role in DISCLOSURE.  Characters are constantly
using computers to communicate or gather information.  Electronic mail
and computer-based video conferencing are major forms of communication
in Digicorp.  One of the film's highlights is a big climactic scene
involving a virtual-reality based filing system. This sequence features
some very impressive computer graphics effects created by Industrial
Light and Magic.  While some of the technology is a bit futuristic
(particularly the Virtual Reality sequence) to be commonplace in
today's business, nothing is shown that is entirely beyond the
capabilities of today.  The various computer interfaces shown do tend
to be more photogenic than practical.
     While Attanasio's screenplay does muddy some of the motivations
behind the story, it is still a generally effective adaptation.  He
streamlined Crichton's story by eliminating a few unnecessary
characters and subplots.  He also managed to introduce some appreciated
touches of humor which were absent from Crichton's generally humorless
novel.  The writing isn't quite as intelligent as Attanasio's earlier
script for QUIZ SHOW, but it still does manage to inject some moments
of insight.
     After seriously misfiring with TOYS and JIMMY HOLLYWOOD, Levinson
is essentially working as a hired hand on this film.  The direction is
very slick and confident, though, and the film moves along at a very
rapid pace.  In a departure for a Barry Levinson film, this one is shot
in Panavision (by Tony Pierce-Roberts) and the widescreen frame is well
used to highlight the impressive sets created for the Digicorp offices
as well as some of the high- tech special effects.  Ennio Morricone's
score is unmemorable but not intrusive.
     DISCLOSURE doesn't really succeed as the controversial morality
play that is promised in the advertising, but it does work as a very
entertaining corporate thriller.  The movie isn't nearly as deep as it
would like to be, but it does manage to be a lot of fun.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
     An odd trend in movies this year is good filmmakers paying loving
tribute to bad art.  Earlier this month, director Tim Burton's tribute
to one of the worst filmmakers of all-time was released.  Now with PULP
FICTION, another hot young director, Quentin Tarantino, has paid
tribute to some of the worst that literature has to offer.  The result
is an intriguing, unusual film that eventually is hurt by the fact that
it emulates the lurid novels that inspired it a bit *too* well.
     Tarantino's screenplay intertwines four different stories
(credited to Tarantino and Roger Avery) only occasionally allowing
those stories to intersect.  The film occasionally shifts, sometimes
awkwardly, to follow different stories.  One story involves a couple of
robbers/lovers (Tim Roth and Amanda Plummer)  who decide to try and
simplify their lives with a switch to robbing restaurants instead of
liquor stores.  Another story follows a hitman named Vincent (John
Travolta) as he is required to take his boss' wife Mia (Uma Thurman)
out to dinner while the boss (Ving Rhames) is out of town.  A third
story is centered around boxer Butch Coolidge (Bruce Willis) who fails
to take a fall as ordered after being paid off by Rhames.  Finally, the
fourth story involves Vincent and his partner Jules (Samuel L. Jackson)
as they try to clean up the messy results of a hit gone wrong.
     The film does not attempt to tell these stories in a linear
manner.  The film is broken up into "chapters" much like a real pulp
novel.  It even includes cheesy chapter titles that are used to
indicate the shift to a different storyline.  The movie even doubles
back on itself a number of times instead of allowing events to unfold
in a chronological order.  Like the novels that inspired the film, PULP
FICTION largely abandons all the standard rules of structure and orders
the scenes for maximum impact.
     The cast works largely as an ensemble and the performances are
without exception very good.  Of course, pulp novels are not known for
strong characterizations, but the actors manage to create some very
distinctive and performances even with relatively little to work with.
Many critics have discussed this film as being a "comeback" for John
Travolta and it certainly is his strongest performance in a long time.
His character is written as kind of a dim bulb, but Travolta manages to
give him some distinctive personality.  During one of the film's best
sequences, Travolta and Thurman participate in a dance contest.  It
really comes through to the audience that he is having an absolutely
terrific time sending up his earlier career.
     Besides Travolta, Bruce Willis is probably the actor with the most
screen time in this movie.  Willis is another actor who often does not
receive the respect that he deserves.  He has occasionally made some
poor choices when selecting movies, but his performances are frequently
very strong.  Without strong direction he does sometimes mug a bit too
much, but Tarantino does a good job keeping him under control here.
     Samuel L. Jackson is the actor who may end up benefiting the most
from this film.  He is given the most serious and most well-developed
character here and gives a career making performance.  Jackson has been
solid in a number of high profile films (including JURASSIC PARK), but
this is the meatiest, most interesting performance he has given to
date.
     Two of the film's most enjoyable performances are essentially
cameos.  Like in his earlier screenplay for TRUE ROMANCE, Tarantino
wrote one wonderful, brief scene for Christopher Walken.  I won't ruin
anything by trying to describe his monologue, but it provides the
film's biggest laugh.  Harvey Keitel is also allowed to shine in a
small, but pivotal role as a "problem solver".  The role is basically a
variation on Keitel's earlier role in POINT OF NO RETURN, but he plays
it to the hilt.  Other entertaining cameo performances are given by
Eric Stoltz, Rosanna Arquette, and even Tarantino himself.
     Tarantino's biggest strength as a writer tends to be dialog.  This
movie is packed with clever conversation.  A number of cliched
situations are livened up by the unusually sharp and memorable dialog.
Tarantino perfectly captures the vulgar, profanity-laced dialog that is
standard in pulp novels.  Tarantino is also very good at capturing on
film the lurid and vulgar tone of the individual scenes from a pulp
novel.  The scenes all *feel* like they came from an old-fashioned dime
novel.
     Despite the film's many strengths, it eventually is hurt by its
very subject matter.  The movie is full of interesting parts and
pieces, but none of it ever really adds up to much of anything.  This
is generally true of the novels that inspired the film as well, but
this leaves the viewer with kind of an empty feeling.
     Another problem is that pulp novels tend to be best in small
doses.  The constant vulgarity and graphic violence tends to wear thin
after a while and to become kind of tedious.  At over two and a half
hours in length, PULP FICTION goes on a bit too long.  It is helped
somewhat by the shifts from story to story, but it still becomes a bit
headache inducing after a while.
     One of the best ways to judge a film is to look at how well the
movie accomplishes what it sets out to do and PULP FICTION really does
succeed very well by this test.  It is a *very* accurate recreation of
the pulp novels that inspired it with all of their strengths and
weaknesses.  The movie goes on a bit long and it consists of a lot of
interesting parts that never really come together all that well, but it
is still a very interesting and worthwhile effort.

Title
Review for Nell (1994)
     Occasionally, a film will contain performances that are so strong
that they are able to help it to get past major problems.  NELL is a
good example of this.  The performances by Liam Neeson, Natasha
Richardson, and especially Jodie Foster make the film worth seeing
despite some major miscalculations with the story.
     The title character (Foster) is a young woman who grew up in an
isolated cabin in the woods.  Her mother had escaped from civilization
after being raped (Nell was conceived from the rape).  After the death
of the mother, Nell is discovered by a group that included country
doctor Jerry Lovell (Neeson).  Nell is totally unaccustomed to
strangers and speaks a language that only she understands.  After the
court gives Lovell thirty days to prove that Nell is capable of living
outside of a mental institution, he begins a determined effort to learn
to communicate with him.  The mental institution is represented by Dr.
Paula Olsen (Richardson) who also goes to the woods to observe Nell.
     By far, this film's greatest strength is Jodie Foster's
wonderfully nuanced performance in the title role.  Since the majority
of Nell's dialog is in an unfamiliar language, Foster is required to
convey virtually all of the character's thoughts and feelings through a
combination of body language, facial expressions, and vocal
inflection.  Just as the characters in the film need to struggle a bit
to understand what Nell is trying to express, her emotions need to
sometimes seem a bit opaque to the audience as well.  Foster is able to
strike this difficult balance.  As Drs. Lovell and Olsen are learning
more about the character, we too become aware of new nuances to
Foster's performance.  A second viewing of this film is probably
necessary to fully appreciate what Foster has accomplished.
     Some critics may be tempted to dismiss Foster's performance as a
flashy grab for an Oscar, but that isn't really fair.  Foster has
already proven herself to be one of the finest actors of her generation
(she won 2 Oscars in the last 5 years) so it seems genuinely believable
that she was primarily attracted by the pure challenge of this role.
Nell is a complex and fascinating character and Foster does a very
impressive job bringing her to life.
     In the shadow of Foster's performance, Neeson and Richardson may
not receive the recognition that they deserve for their work in this
film.  During most of the film, Neeson essentially serves as a stand-in
for the audience.  Neeson shows Dr. Lovell's constant search for a
better understanding of Nell's behavior while also standing back to
allow the audience to discover her secrets themselves. Neeson was
required to give a quiet, subtle, primarily reactive performance and he
plays it very well.
     Richardson also finds just the right note with her performance.
She plays a skeptic in the film who initially questions Nell's
intelligence and competence, but eventually is turned around through
her first-hand observations.  She manages to believably show this
initial skepticism while avoiding the temptation to allow the character
to become unlikable.  Her character grows through knowledge, but does
not undergo radical personality changes.
     In real life, Neeson and Richardson are husband and wife.  Their
obvious natural chemistry serves the film well when their characters
begin the inevitable romance.  The most interesting aspect of the
on-screen relationship is the basically >parental

     While the three lead performances are terrific, the script by
William Nicholson and Mark Handley (based on Handley's play
"Idoglossia") has some very serious problems.  To put it simply, the
film is overplotted.  When the film concentrates on the 2 doctors'
exploration of Nell's world and Nell's introduction to the civilized
world, the film is fascinating.  Unfortunately, Nicholson and Handley
insisted on adding artificial conflict.
     In a film that absolutely did not need a literal villain, they
added Richard Libertini as the head of the mental health institute.  He
plays a highly cliched bureaucrat who appears heartless in his efforts
to have Nell institutionalized.  His character is completely
one-dimensional and uninteresting.  This subplot takes over the last
part of the film with some unnecessary sequences with Nell committed to
the cold, unpleasant institution.  It finally leads to an absolutely
ludicrous courtroom finale.
     The film is also undermined by an unfortunate subplot involving a
group of country rednecks who try to terrorize Nell.  The film briefly
introduces the interesting idea of the press reaction to Nell's
existence, but that idea is left generally undeveloped (except as a
plot device in the mental institution subplot).
     The one other major mistake was the use of occasional flashbacks
that reveal to the audience the origins of Nell's language before the
characters in the film learn it.  This is information that would have
had more impact had it been revealed in a more subtle manner.  Taking
an omniscient view for this one plot element just doesn't work.
     Despite these mistakes, the parts of the film that do work are
very good.  If the script had jettisoned these unnecessary subplots, it
could have been quite a remarkable film.  I'm not familiar with
Handley's original play, but I tend to wonder if some of these extra
elements might have been added in an attempt to "open up" the story for
the screen.  The film's best elements seem like they would also work
well on the stage while the less successful parts probably would have
been even more blatantly out of place in a play.
     Visually, NELL is a >very

     NELL is a flawed film, but one that is very much worth seeing for
the wonderful leading performances.  With a tighter script it could
have been one of the year's best films.  In its final form, it is still
a very good one.

Title
Review for Little Princess, A (1995)
     Towards the end of A LITTLE PRINCESS, there is a scene where
the young heroine awakes to find that something purely magical has
occurred.  The night before, she and her friend had been using their
imagination to escape from the sad realism of their world.  In the
morning, they discover that what they had imagined had become
reality.  Magic is the *only* explanation that the film offers for
this event.  The scene works completely because, by this point, the
movie has completely convinced the audience that magic is truly
possible as long as you believe in it hard enough.
     This is the second film adaptation of Frances Hodgson
Burnett's classic children's novel "Sara Crewe", which was previously
filmed in 1939 with Shirley Temple (in a film that was also entitled
A LITTLE PRINCESS).  Screenwriters Richard LaGravenese and Elizabeth
Chandler along with director Alfonso Cuaron have created an absolute
gem of a movie, by far the best of 1995 to date.
     Fantasy is frequently an important part of the movies, but
this is a special film that is *about* fantasy and the power of the
human imagination.  The story is centered around young Sara Crewe
(Liesel Matthews), the daughter of a British Army captain.  After her
mother's death, her father has raised her on his own in India.  When
the father has to go off to fight in World War I, Sara is sent to a
New York boarding school run by the cruel and strict Miss Minchin
(Eleanor Bron).
     Even in the oppressive environment of the boarding school,
Sara maintains an unswerving belief in the power of imagination and
the existence of magic.  Through her undying spirit, she is able to
bring new life to everyone around her with the exception Miss
Minchin.  This is largely accomplished through Sara's telling of
elaborate, fantastic stories about life in India.  Cuaron beautifully
intercuts this storytelling with colorful fantasy sequences that 
visually bring the stories to life.  These fantasy sequences really
work because they actually seem like they are being shown from the
point-of-view of Sara's own imagination.
     Bron plays Miss Minchin as a menacing and controlling villain,
but she isn't purely evil. It seems clear that Miss Minchin feels
*threatened* by Sara's complete acceptance of magic and fantasy. Miss
Minchin is so completely steeped in the "real" world that she is not
only unwilling, but also *unable* to recognize the power of the
imagination.  In one key scene, Sara directly confronts Miss Minchin
with her belief that it is the right of all girls to be princesses. 
After this scene, it was a bit startling to realize that the look on
Miss Minchin's face is *regret* that she is unable to see the world
the same way.
     As Sara, Liesel Matthews gives a very natural, convincing
performance.  She truly has the *look* of a "little princess."  Some
of this comes from her natural appearance, but even more it comes
from the way that she carries herself and by her facial expressions. 
She appears to be wise, but not in a precocious way.  At all times,
she seems like a *real* child, but one that truly understands the
wonder of childhood.
     Initially, the early scenes between Sara and her father (Liam
Cunningham) may seem a little overly sappy.  Their relationship is so
loving and good that it stretches believability a little bit.  After
a while, though, I found that I understood the reasons that the
relationship was portrayed in this manner.  This relationship
*needed* to seem ideal in order for some of the later events of the
film to have their proper impact.
     Sometimes the right music score can greatly enhance even the
finest films.  Patrick Doyle has provided some absolutely amazing
music for this one.  Ever since he burst onto the scene with his
powerful score to Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V, Doyle has been one of
the most exciting working film composers.  This score is probably his
best effort to date.  He has provided a magical, almost operatic
score that mixes soaring orchestral music with some terrific vocal
and choral pieces.
     After a tragedy occurs towards the middle of the film, Sara
begins to lose her spirit.  That spirit is rekindled in a powerful
and magical sequence where she awakes in the night and discovers that
it has started to snow.  We are able to literally *feel* her faith in
magic returning as she dances in the snow.  The scene simply would
not have worked without the accompaniment Doyle's hauntingly
beautiful song "Kindle My Heart."  In the liner notes for the
soundtrack CD, Cuaron explains that the scene was literally designed 
*around* that song.  What an incredible testament to the power of
Doyle's music.
     So much of the impact of A LITTLE PRINCESS is purely emotional
that it is a somewhat difficult film to review.  It is tough to
precisely put my finger on exactly *why* this film works so well.  In
the end, I always come back to my total acceptance of that one
magical scene that I referenced at the beginning of this review.  For
me, the best movies are the ones that tell a story so convincingly
that I am willing to completely accept anything that happens, no
matter how unlikely.  That is exactly what happened here. 
     I actually saw the film a few weeks ago, but did not feel
ready to write my review before this.  It has surprised me a bit how
much I have found myself thinking about the film.  Even at this late
date, I feel that it is important for me to make an attempt to
capture some of my feelings about the film in writing.
     I also feel that this review is a worthwhile effort because
the movie really *needs* all of the support it can get. 
Unfortunately, Warner Bros has chosen to dump the film with little
support.  Here in Columbus, Ohio they released the film with
virtually no advertising and without even holding advance screenings
for local reviewers.  The critic for the largest local newspaper
didn't manage to get his rave review for the film published until 4
days after the movie opened (and after its opening weekend had
passed).  At this time, the film has already virtually disappeared
from theaters.  I urge anyone reading this *not* to let this
wonderful movie get away.  I also want to emphasize that this is not
just a movie for small children.  It is a movie for *anyone* that
appreciates good stories and magical filmmaking.
-- 
Jeffrey P. Graebner
Columbus, Ohio

Title
Review for Hoop Dreams (1994)
     The lives of real people can sometimes be far more interesting
than anything that a screenwriter can imagine.  Because of this, it is
completely possible for a good documentary to be as dramatic and
engrossing as any fiction film. HOOP DREAMS is a strong example of what
can be accomplished with the documentary form.
     HOOP DREAMS follows two Chicago inner-city youth through their
high school years.  At the beginning of the film, we meet William Gates
and Arthur Agee, two fourteen-year-old kids getting ready to begin high
school.  Both are extremely talented basketball players that are
recruited by St. Joseph High School, a small private school that
includes NBA-star Isiah Thomas among its alumni.  Both Gates and Agee
are recruited from inner-city playground basketball courts and are
given scholarships to help them attend the expensive private school.
The film follows them through their high school graduation, ending as
both are leaving for college.
     Filmmakers Steve James, Fredrick Marx and Peter Gilbert originally
conceived this project as a short subject for PBS (it is partially
financed by KTCA-TV out of Minneapolis with additional financial
support from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting). Over time, it
became obvious that they had a much bigger story here.  The result is a
fascinating 3-hour-and-45-minute examination of the lives of Gates and
Agee.  Over the course of the film, we truly feel that we come to know
these kids and their families.  It left me wanting to know more about
what happens to these people.
     The makers of this film were very fortunate to have chosen Gates
and Agee as their subjects.  There are some parallels to their lives,
but for the most part, they go in widely different directions.  The
different lives of the two boys allow the filmmakers to show a wide
variety of experiences.  The film is extremely well edited, smoothly
cutting from one boy to the other.  Often, the film is deftly edited to
compare and contrast their experiences.
     As we first meet them, Agee and Gates seem to be starting from the
same point.  The film makes it completely clear that the St. Joseph
administration invited both boys to attend based on their potential on
the basketball court.  Gates quickly lives up the school's expectations
and the school bends over backwards to provide him the financial help
needed to continue attending.  The St. Joseph coach frequently points
out a similarity between Gates and Isiah Thomas, leading him to believe
that Gates is another chance for the school to generate a star.
     Agee, on the other hand, does *not* initially prove to be a
basketball star. Because of this, the school essentially abandons him.
Shortly into his sophomore year, he is forced to drop out of St.
Joseph when his family can no longer afford tuition.  As shown in the
film, it looks very much like both boys were "hired" to play for St.
Joseph.  When Agee's playing didn't live up to the school's lofty
expectations, they essentially "fired" him.  The rest of the movie
follows Agee's experiences at Marshall High School, an inner-city
public school.  At Marshall, Agee eventually comes into his own as a
basketball star.
     Basketball plays a key role in this film, but the film isn't
really about the sport itself.  Instead, the sport represents
opportunity for both Gates and Agee.  They see it as their ticket to a
better life.  As the film explores the other people in their life, we
also see that some people see the chance to live vicariously through
the boys.  In particular, Agee's father and Gates' brother both are
looking to the boys for a "second chance" to fulfill their own dreams
of a basketball career.
     Isiah Thomas is frequently mentioned in the film as the ultimate
example of someone who escaped from inner-city life to NBA stardom.
Both families and the St. Joseph coach frequently express a desire for
Agee and/or Gates to become the next Thomas.  The film subtlely
suggests that both boys might have been better off if they had been
pushed to be *themselves* instead of trying to get them to emulate
Thomas' success.
     For the most part, director Steve James stays in the background
allowing his subjects to tell their own stories.  Where necessary,
James does provide some understated narration, but he also knows when
elaboration is not necessary.  The narration never overshadows the
events being shown or the words of the people being interviewed.
     The film also benefits a great deal from the adept camerawork.
The filmmakers have a good instinct about what to photograph, resulting
in them showing some very key moments in the kids' lives.  Of course,
persistence is also a big contributor to this success. The filmmakers
reportly shot well over 100 hours of footage allowing them to choose
from a wide variety of material.  The ambition of the project
definitely pays off in the finished film.
     The fact that the film is showing the lives of real people
provides HOOP DREAMS with a very refreshing unpredictability.  Real
life doesn't have standard formulas like most fiction films.  There are
numerous surprises in the film thanks to the fact that we are being
shown real events as they actually happened.  This unpredictability is
most evident during the basketball scenes.  In most fictional movie
sporting events, it is easy to predict whether or not the heroes will
win the big game.  In this movie, the sporting events are all real with
an equal likelihood of winning or losing.
     As good as this film is, it isn't perfect.  At times, the
filmmakers seemed a little too interested in the basketball games. It
certainly was necessary to show a lot of footage of the boys' playing,
but the filmmakers often feel that the games speak for themselves.  It
eventually begins to seem repetitive.  The later basketball sequences
were the only times that I found myself noticing the film's length.
The movie really needed to elaborate on what these games *meant* to the
people involved.  I would have liked to have heard Gates, Agee, and
their family *commenting* during some of the game sequences.  Instead,
we get nothing but James providing dry, purely descriptive commentary
on what is happening.
     Another problem is probably inherent to the documentary form.  The
subjects are clearly aware of the presense of the camera and are
understandably unwilling to show some of their more unhappy
experiences.  There are hints of certain key events that clearly didn't
happen while the camera was present.  In particular, we are given some
sketchy details about problems with Agee's father.  We are told that he
has a drug problem and that he left the family a couple times, but
there is a definite feeling that many of the details were kept from the
cameras.  We learn a lot about these people, but it is hard not to feel
that there was a lot going on that we *don't* learn.
     The film's origin as a TV project causes a major technical problem
when seeing it in a movie theater.  Most of the footage was shot on
videotape which does not transfer extremely well to 35mm film.  The
whole film is visibly blurred, making it a bit difficult to watch.  The
blurring particularly made it difficult to follow many of the
basketball sequences.  The cathartic effects of seeing this film with a
crowd makes it worth seeing in a theater, but this is a very rare case
of a film that will *look* considerably better on video.
     In the long run, these flaws do not take much away from the power
of this film.  HOOP DREAMS provides a fascinating look at some pivotal
events in some very real lives.  This is a very special film that
allows the viewer to meet some very special people.  It is an absolute
must-see film.

Title
Review for Circle of Friends (1995)
     Recently, Ireland has produced a number of interesting and
intelligent films.  The latest Irish-import, CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, is a
smart and charming  coming-of-age drama that provides a thoughtful look
at the complexities of young romance.
     The film follows the romance of Benny (Minnie Driver) and Jack
(Chris O'Donnell), two Irish college students experiencing love and
romance for the first time.  Their romance is contrasted with separate
romances experienced by Benny's two closest friends: repressed Eve
(Geraldine O'Rawe) and worldly Nan (Saffron Burrows).
     Much of the film's appeal comes from the thoughtful and believable
way that screenwriter Andrew Davies (working from a novel by Maeve
Binchy) has these characters approach issues of relationships and
sexuality.  The film is set in 1957 and does reflect the more openly
conservative values of the time, but the writing still seems
contemporary thanks to the writer's recognition that most of the base
feelings and concerns in these areas never change all that much.
     The movie is at its best when it simply has the main characters
talking to each other.  We discover that Benny and Jack are right for
each other during some wonderful early sequences where they go on walks
together and find that they are able to freely talk with one another
about anything.  The physical attraction between the characters isn't
ignored, but the film makes it clear that the emotional and
intellectual attraction is what really counts the most.
     Davies and director Pat O'Connor wisely keep the secondary
romances involving Eve and Nan in the background, only using them to
provide counterpoints to the main romance between Benny and Jack. Eve
is an orphan that was raised by nuns in a convent, giving her extremely
traditional Catholic views.  Her romance with another college boy
(Aiden Gillen) is marked by an interesting combination curiosity and a
desire to remain true to her values.  Nan, on the other hand, is much
more worldly and quicker to jump head first into a passionate affair
with an older man (Colin Firth).  Both of these romances are used to
contrast Benny and Jack's romance with more extreme examples.  A twist
in Nan's romance also eventually provides some conflict into several of
the film's key relationships.
     One refreshing aspect of the film is the very realistic way that
religion is included as a major factor in the characters' lives.  The
girls are all Irish Catholics and many of their conversations include
some discussion of the conflict between their religious beliefs and
their natural curiosity about sex.  It is rare today that a film treats
religious values as a subject worthy of thoughtful discussion.
     The one major part of the film that doesn't work is an unfortunate
subplot involving Sean (Alan Cumming), a clerk at Benny's store who is
a rival for her affections.  This subplot is very ineptly played and it
winds up being an unwelcome distraction.  The big mistake is making
Sean into an >obviousthey

     Minnie Driver's performance is one of the best reasons to see this
film.  She is a very smart and charming presence who easily carries
every scene that she is in.  The film makes the point that she is a bit
overweight and generally plain-looking, but she has an inner-beauty
that is instantly recognizable.  In an early scene, Jack very
accurately describes Benny as a "solid" personality who truly knows who
she is and what she wants.  Driver's very smart and sincere performance
clearly conveys this to the audience.
     Chris O'Donnell is developing a lot of skill as a strong
supporting actor.  He is a very generous actor who truly knows when to
stand back and let other actors dominate the scene.  In this film,
Benny is very much the central character and it is important to let
Jack be primarily defined by her reactions to him.  O'Donnell is able
to do this, quietly playing off of Driver's more dominating performance
to create an interesting chemistry.  It takes a lot of skill for an
actor to know when to stay out of the way.
     CIRCLE OF FRIENDS is a small, pleasant film with some very
thoughtful and intelligent dialog and a tremendously good lead
performance by Minnie Driver.  The film is marred somewhat by the
unfortunate subplot involving the store clerk, but the parts of the
film that work are easily able to overcome the parts that don't.

Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
     On a recent edition of his CBS talk show, David Letterman jokingly
stated that he had just seen Robert Redford's new film QUIZ SHOW and
that he felt compelled to confess that his show is completely fixed.
The basis of the humor in this joke is the fact that nobody today would
ever believe that the show *wasn't* mostly carefully planned and
scripted.  Letterman's joke actually hit on the essence of what
Redford's film is all about.
     QUIZ SHOW is a dramatization of the mid-1950s investigation into
early quiz shows that eventually resulted in the discovery that the
winners were pre- determined by providing contestants with the answers
ahead of time.  The film specifically follows young congressional
lawyer Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow) as he investigates the claims of
disgruntled contestant Herbert Stempel (John Turturro) that the
producers of the popular quiz show "Twenty-One" forced him to take a
dive allowing charming intellectual Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes)
to become the new champion.
     Paul Attanasio's smart, witty, and insightful screenplay feels
much like a detective story as Goodwin interviews suspects and digs
through papers and kinescopes slowly uncovering details about how
deeply the fraud extends.  The film gives the audience most of the
details up front, mostly in scenes where producer Dan Enright (David
Paymer) and his assistant Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria) are coaching
the contestants.  Giving the audience an omniscient view was a smart
move since most people will already have some familiarity with the true
events and would likely been annoyed if the film hadn't acknowledged
that.
     None of the characters in this film are clearly heroes or
villains.  Stempel is portrayed as an opportunistic man who comes
forward only when he no longer feels that staying silent is to his own
best advantage.  The film makes it rather clear that Enright could have
easily bought his silence if he had been willing to meet his price.
Stempel eventually does the right thing, but not entirely for the right
reasons.  Still, he isn't an evil man by any means.  He is shown to be
mostly a loving husband and father who is mostly looking for a better
life for himself.  We learn that his family has largely been supported
by his wife's parents and that he wants nothing more than to be able to
support his family on his own.
     Van Doren is shown as being an essentially good man who is seduced
by the easy fame and fortune being offered to him.  He is initially
reluctant to accept the answers and spends quite a bit of time trying
to figure out ways to justify his actions to himself.  Goodwin is also
less than perfect.  He takes a strong liking to Van Doren and clearly
doesn't care much for Stempel.  As a result, he attempts to protect Van
Doren while essentially allowing Stempel to hang himself.  In one of
the film's best written sequences, Van Doren asks Goodwin outright
whether or not he would have given into the same temptations.  Goodwin
repeatedly stammers a "no" as if he is struggling to convince himself.
     Even Enright and Freedman are not pure villains.  They are both
shown as being under strong directives from both the network and the
sponsor to hold on to popular contestants who generate high ratings.
On a larger scale, the shows are fixed simply because that is what the
audience demands.  They want to see the contestants that they like best
win and the producers are essentially giving them what they want.  At
one point, the sponsor (well-played by Martin Scorsese in a rare
acting role) tells Goodwin that if he succeeds in stopping the quiz
shows from being fixed that the result will be that the games will
simply become easier.  Of course, we all know that quiz shows survived
this scandal and that they *are* now much easier (witness the
popularity of "Wheel of Fortune," for example).
     On the surface, it might appear that Goodwin is the character we
are meant to identify with the most, but in truth the film also expects
us to recognize a bit of ourselves in Stempel and Van Doren.  Turturro
plays Stempel as a nerdy little guy whose strongest asset is his
ability to remember trivial information (often with little
comprehension).  The quiz show provides him with an opportunity for
fame and fortune but, more importantly, it provides him with some
*respect*.  Could any of us truly resist the opportunity to suddenly be
viewed as being smarter and more successful than we ever were before?
     As played by Fiennes, Van Doren is shown as being a true
intellectual with an upper-crust background.  He probably could have
had a great deal of success on the quiz show *without* cheating, but he
is seduced by the chance at an easy road to success.  Van Doren lives
under the shadow of his scholarly, Pulitzer-Prize-winning father
(wonderfully played by Paul Scofield).  His success on "Twenty-One"
helps him to move out of that shadow, in a sense gaining some of the
same respect that Stempel was seeking.  In the end, it is this desire
for his father's respect that makes it impossible for Van Doren to
continue to keep his secret.
     Goodwin essentially is the film's stand-in for the viewing
audience.  He is a fan of the quiz shows and is somewhat shocked to
learn that his trust has been betrayed.  He is also seduced by Van
Doren's charm and even becomes friends with him.  Morrow and Fiennes
play very well together and their scenes together are many of the
film's best.  Morrow plays Goodwin as a man who is somewhat trapped
between Stemple's and Van Doren's worlds.  He comes from a humble, New
York background much like Stemple's, but also likes to repeatedly point
out that he was first in his class at Harvard.  Morrow even plays the
role with a bizarre accent that seems to be a combination of Brooklyn
and Boston (unfortunately, this accent does make his dialog a bit
difficult to understand at times).
     Redford's direction, Michael Ballhaus' photography, and the work
of the production designers all do a great job of capturing the feel of
a simpler time period.  Everything looks right and the general
attitudes and ideas of the people on screen all seem correct.  Some of
the shock at the scandal comes from the simple fact that people were
less cynical back then.
     At its heart, this is really a movie about the point where mass
communications started to erode the naive trust that the public once
felt for the media.  As television has increased the flow of
information into our homes, it has also caused the public to become
more aware and less trusting. Today, most people are very aware of the
business aspects of television.  Today's quiz shows may not be
directly fixed, but most people are certainly aware of the care they
take to audition contestants to determine how they will go over with
the audience.  As the sponsor in the film suggested, they have also
been made easier.  Today's audience also tend to show a certain amount
of distrust towards other parts of television as well.  Letterman's
joke is particularly ironic since the "realism" of today's talk shows
is probably as questionable as the quiz shows shown in the film.  With
the growing influence of tabloid-style journalism, even the news has
become suspect.
     QUIZ SHOW provides an interesting expansion on some of the ideas
considered just last month in Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS.
Stone brought up the question of when news starts to become
sensationalism that is unworthy of reporting.  Redford's film may lead
one to question whether or not the stories being reported are even
*true*.
     Ironically, Redford's film itself is generating some controversy
about its accuracy.  The film fictionalizes some of the situations and
beefs up the importance of certain personalities (particularly
Goodwin).  It also narrows the story by concentrating solely on
"Twenty-One," only obliquely referencing the fact that other quiz shows
of the time were also fixed.  This bit of controversy may actually
*increase* the impact of the film.  It helps to underscore the fact
that the media frequently skews the truth to fit a specific agenda (in
this case, the alterations are largely made simply to make the film
more dramatic, entertaining, and easier to follow) and that one should
never depend completely on any one source for information
     QUIZ SHOW is one of the most fascinating, entertaining, and
thought-provoking films of 1994.  It is bound to generate a lot of
worthwhile discussion while also providing a simple, old-fashioned good
time at the movies.

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     No matter what you think of the content of his films, it is hard
to deny Oliver Stone is one of the most innovative mainstream
filmmakers in Hollywood.  Few directors are as consistently willing to
take major chances.  With NATURAL BORN KILLERS, he has created a film
that is unlike any other movie ever made.  Some people are going to
absolutely love the film and others are going to absolutely hate it.
Far more are going to be left exhausted, bewildered, and generally
undecided about whether or not it worked.  I fit into the latter
category.
     The first half of this mostly plotless film is a warped road
picture as we follow mass-murderers Mickey and Mallory Knox (played by
Woody Harrelson and Juliette Lewis) as they go on a rampage committing
one violent murder after another.  About half-way through, Mickey and
Mallory are captured at which point this turns into a bizarre prison
film.  Much of the action in the last half revolves around a
unscrupulous reporter (played by Robert Downey Jr.) who will do pretty
much anything for a prison interview with Mickey, a borderline crazy
prison warden (played by Tommy Lee Jones), and the corrupt police
detective (played by Tom Sizemore) who captured Mickey and Mallory.
     All of these characters are written and played so completely over
the top that they are essentially live-action cartoons.  Very little
effort is expended trying to develop any motivation for the behavior of
the characters.  Other than a couple very brief flashes of childhood
memory, nothing is told about Mickey's background.  An early flashback
sequence does give us a little background into Mallory's childhood, but
it is one of the most bizarre movie sequences in recent memory.  The
whole thing is shot like a TV sitcom (including a laugh track) with her
abusive father played by Rodney Dangerfield and her weak mother played
by Edie McClurg.  Dangerfield and McClurg play the characters like
typical sitcom parents, except for Dangerfield's occasional tendency to
verbally, physically, and sexually abuse his daughter.
     The whole movie is so intensely stylized and throws so many
cinematic tricks at us that this flashback sequence doesn't even seem
particularly out of place.  In fact, I'm not sure that much of
*anything* could seem out of place in this movie.  The audio/visual
style of this movie is virtually impossible to describe.  It basically
has to be seen to be believed.  Stone uses virtually every conceivable
type of film stock and photography, even throwing in bits of animation
on occasion.  Scenes constantly switch from color to black and white
and from 8mm to 16mm to 35mm.  The viewer is rarely given the
opportunity to begin to digest an image before something completely
different is up on the screen.  The overall result is a sensation of
constant chaos, but it is also virtually impossible to take your eyes
off the screen.  It is simultaneously exhausting and exhilarating.
     It all may seem virtually random on first glance, but in truth I
suspect that every frame of this film is carefully crafted and
deliberate.  This is definitely a film that primarily came together in
the editing room.  The whole movie is full of rapid cuts and all kinds
of abstract imagery.  Special effects are often used to combine
seemingly unrelated images on the screen all at once.  Oliver Stone has
never been known for subtlety and much of the symbolism here is
extremely obvious.  In particular, the frequent use of snakes is rather
unsubtle.  Still, this film is a major achievement in cinema editing
and if this film fails to win the "Best Editing" Oscar, then the
Academy simply isn't paying attention.
     The actors all seem to be given little restraints on their
performances.  Harrelson, Lewis, and Jones are essentially playing
their standard screen personas here, but in a highly exaggerated
manner.  Harrelson plays Mickey as if Woody from "Cheers" finally
snapped and became violent.  This is the dark side of the simple-minded
hick that he has been playing for years.  Lewis plays another of her
sweet-looking oddballs.  She is petite and soft-spoken, making it all
the more shocking when she suddenly becomes violent.  Finally, Tommy
Lee Jones has seemed to constantly be on the verge of going
out-of-control in his last few roles.  This time, he is finally allowed
to cross that line.  As you might expect, he is a lot of fun to watch.
     Robert Downey Jr. gives the most entertaining performance in the
film as the reporter.  His character is the most fully formed in the
film and is generally the only one that changes much in the film
(although not necessarily for the better).  Most importantly, he is
given most of the best lines in the film which he delivers with a great
deal of finesse.  On top of all that, he plays the character with a very
convincing Australian accent (although I never was quite sure *why*).
     One significant way in which this movie differs from Stone's past
work is the fact that it is primarily done as satire.  The film
actually is very funny, although much of the laughter is nervous
laughter.  Sometimes you may even feel slightly guilty about what you
are laughing at.  The script contains quite a bit of witty dialog, most
of which is given to Robert Downey Jr.
     Much has been made about the amount of violence in this film.  It
certainly *is* an incredibly violent film and is very much deserving of
its R rating.  Much of the violence is really more implied than
explicit, though, and the rapid editing means that the violent acts
(and their results) are never really on the screen long.  I suspect
that a lot of people will come away from this film thinking that it was
a lot more graphic than it really is.  Still, this is probably not a
movie for the extremely squeamish.
     The one big question that may remain with many viewers after
seeing this movie is what the film is really trying to say.  While the
two films couldn't be more different in content, I suspect that the
reactions to this film may be similar to some of the reactions people
have had to FORREST GUMP.  Like that film, NATURAL BORN KILLERS has a
relatively simple and obvious message on the surface.  This basic
message is about the fact that the media tends to glorify violence and
make celebrities out of criminals.  Unfortunately, the film really has
little of substance to say on this matter.  As a result, many may find
the movie to be shallow.  On the other hand, some people may read
meanings into the film that other people simply don't see.  I suspect
that many people will be left with feelings that are so abstract that
they are virtually impossible to articulate.  I'm left with the strong
feeling that there is a lot more to this movie than meets the eye, but
I really don't know how I can sufficiently explain that fact to someone
else (particularly if they don't see it themselves).
     NATURAL BORN KILLERS is one of the most audacious and original
films to come along in a long time.  It is a two-hour assault on the
senses which will likely leave audiences simultaneously dazzled and
confused.  It is an impressive film that is likely going to generate a
ton of varied reactions and debate.
