Authors
Rodrick Su
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Close My Eyes (1991)
     This is one of the best treatment on the subject of incest that I
have seen.  It is certainly the most erotic film that I seen this year.
This does not mean that the film is exploitive on the subject.  Rather,
the eroticism arises from the very well-constructed story line that
allows the audience to fully experience the emotions of the characters.
     The movie begins with a prologue that spans five years.  Natalie
was an unhappy woman who seems to be emotionally fragile.  By contrast,
Richard, her younger brother, is a self-sufficient man who was always
away from home.  Their affair begins after Natalie's marriage to a
wealthy stock analyst, and continues through the summer.
     A similar work that springs to mind is "`Tis Pity She's A Whore" by
John Ford.  As with the play, the movie presents a brother who has been
separated from his sister for a long time.  Similarly, when the sister
attempts to break off the affair, the other party attempts murder in
retaliation.  But the major departure from the play is the character of
the husband.  Sinclair, the stock analysist husband, did not fly off in
rage like his counterpart in the play.  His action after the affair's
break is very calm and rational.   This character is the only enigma in
the film.  
     Alan Rickman was given the top billing in the film for portraiting
the husband.  His performance in the film is quite a departure from his
usual villainous roles.  Here he gets to portray a man who is not
wholly unlikable.  
     The film is blessed with good performances given by all of the 
actors and actresses involved.  The moody violin score is well used in
setting the emotion of the film.  The cinematography is also excellent.
I highly recommend this film.
