Authors
Janet Miller
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
     I took my teenage daughter to a film last night that I really had
misgivings about.  I had heard that CLUELESS was an okay film but not
anything great.  Still, Elizabeth wanted to go and mother-daughter
bonding and all that.
     So, imagine my surprise when I enjoyed the movie as much as she
did.  Yes, we aren't talking CITIZEN KANE here and there were no
explosions that I can remember, but I found CLUELESS a warm and very
funny movie.
     The heroine, Cher is young, very pretty, and basically a good kid
with perhaps a somewhat warped sense of what is important in life, but
then again how many teens have their entire act together when they are
in high school.
     She was usually nice to other people, lectured on not using drugs
in school, and was still a virgin since she was saving herself for
someone special.  After all, you can see how particular she was about
shoes and they only go on your feet.
     What else I noticed, is that the people in the film were mostly
good people.  So often in films like this, the parents are dumb and
Cher's dad is busy, but he still keeps track of her grades and praises
her when she does well.  We also see him catch on to a budding romance
before either of the two party's do.
     A lot has been made of the language of the film as a combination
of phony valley talk and "large" words.  The language may not reflect
real kid speak, but it was cute and wasn't offensive.  And anything
that encourages kids to improve their vocabulary can't be all bad.
Most kids in upper level English classes are being taught vocabulary
words that will show up on the SATs so I didn't find Cher's usage
strange at all.  My daughter has been known to talk like that and she's
just starting high school.
     Anyway, I thought the movie was fun, my daughter and I had a good
time and I would recommend it for teens and parents with a sense of
humor.
