Authors
Jason Bacon
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
I welcome the newness, the fresh look of the King of Kitsch. Quentin
Tarantino's new movie, Jackie Brown, is just that. Bt it's also alot
more. It shows a director maturing. And a mature Quentin is a good thing
indeed.
 Based on the book Rum Punch by Get Shorty author Elmore Leonard, Jackie
Brown revives Pam Grier from a life of blaxplotation retirment, and
Robert Forster, who turns in what may be the film's best performance
(obviously, since it got him that Oscar nomination).
 Grier plays Jackie Brown, an airline stewardess and sometimes money
runner for Ordell Robbie (Samuel L. Jackson, who ignites the screen as
always). When ATF agent Ray Nicolet (Michael Keaton) and an LAPD officer
pick Jackie up for running money, she begins to get a scheme.
 Robbie goes to get her bonded,and sees bail bondsman Max Cherry (Robert
Forster). And soon after, Jackie is double-crossing all who try to stop
her plan from working. Plus, Cherry begins to care for Jackie, and the
expressions on Forster's face as he watches Jackie from afar or even
talk to her is reminiscent of a lonely little boy in elemenatry school,
eager for the popualr girl's attention.
 Also along for the ride in this Tarantino epic is Robert DeNiro,
suprisingly subdued, as Louis Gara, Ordell's cronie from the days of
yesteryear, and Bridget Fonda as Melanie, Ordell's pot-smoking,
sex-obsessed, tan beach bunny.
 One clever scene involves a conversation and a photo between DeNiro and
Fonda. It is perfectly Tarantino. There are many other memorable
moments, like a POV shoot from three different people. All in all,
Quentin Tarantino's latest film is a winner, and makes one salivate for
his next project. (and the play he's in now, Wait Until Dark) What else
would you expect from the Master of Witty Dialogue? One of the best
films of 1997, and definitely one of the very slim films of recent years
that makes you wish that the film would never end.

Title
Review for Metro (1997)
        METRO
  I've seen San Francisco in movies many times. There was 1994's
Interview With The Vampire and most recently The Rock. Now, yet again,
San Francisco is the setting for this movie.
  Eddie Murphy stars as Inspector Scott Roper of the SFPD. he is their
top hostage negotiator, and the very best at what he does.
  When his best friend on the force is killed by Joe (Michael Wincott,
in a terrific performance), a psychotic, demented jewel thief, Roger
makes it his mission to capture the guy before he strikes again.
  Meanwhile, Roper tries to rekindle a relationship with his British
ex-girlfriend Veronica, while helping to rear a new up and comer from
SWAT who's an expert sniper and marksman (Michael Rappaport).
  Despite the obligatory cop movie scenes (does EVERY cop/new partner
movie have to start the same way?) where the Sgt. assigns Roper a
partner, Roper confronts the sarge, etc., this film is still one heck of
an explosive ride.
  A scene involving a cable car has to be seen to be believed, and
boasts some amazing car stunts. Eddie Murphy shines in this tailor-made
role, and for once, his character shows depth and concern. When
confronting Joe in prison, you can feel the anger drip from every word.
  Michael Rappaport is basically throwaway. He serves no purpose, except
to be buddy to Murphy and get disabled in the final reel so that Eddie
can save the day. Typical action escapist fare.
  Michael Wincott offers the best performance as the crazed killer and
jewel thief Joe. Never before have I seen such a villian written like
this where I could actually believe that he was serious and take him
seriously. Maybe I just thought that this role was different due to
Wincott's perfectly raspy voice. I don't know.
  What I do know, though, is that although Metro is basically a typical
action retread, it manages to cover new ground and shed new light on
tired old cliches'. The film is a triumph, and an entertaining one at
that. it doesn't meander or trail off from its main character.
  An enjoyable two hours, Metro is enjoyable, witty, action-packed, and
fun, and makes for a great action movie that's perfect for all of us
that need an escape from reality.

Title
Review for Blues Brothers 2000 (1998)
 While that was the catchphrase of the original film, its sequel, Blues
Brothers 2000, has a new one: "The Lord works in mysterious ways." if
only we could have had some sort of storyline with our movie.
 Anyway, Blues Brothers 2000, once again scrioted by Dan Aykroyd and
John Landis(who, of course also directed ths and the first one), stars
Aykroyd as Elwood J. Blues. He's released from prison 18 years after the
first film, and immediately sets out to find family.
 He learns that both his brother Jake (the talented late John Belushi)
and his stepfather Curtis (the late Cab Calloway) are now deceased from
Mother Mary Stigmata (Kathleen Freeman). Not only does she still whack
him when he misbehaves, but she asks him to mentor Buster (J. Evan
Bonifant), ten-year-orphan. Elwood is reluctant, but agrees to anyway.
 Soon, he meets Mighty Mack (John Goodman), a bartender at the strip
club his former drummer owns. Elwood seeks to, like in the original
film, put the band back together, but is pursued by his stepfather's
illegitamate son Cabel Chamberlain (Joe Morton), the no-nonsense
commander of the Illinois police, a right-wing militia group, and the
Chicago affiliate of the Moscow mafia.
 This all culminates in a "Battle of The Bands" contest held in New
Orleans at a voodoo queen's (R+B star Erykah Badu) mansion between The
Blues Brothers Band and The Louisiana Gator Boys (B.B King, Eric
Clapton, the list goes on and on.).
 In between what should be a plot is instead wonderful musical
production numbers (634-5879 by Wilson Pickett and Eddie Flyod, Turn On
Your Love Light, R-E-S-P-E-C-T by Aretha Franklin, Maybe I'm Wrong by
Blues Traveler, and many, many more).All in all, even though this sequel
didn't have the plot or comedy of its predecessor (and NO ENDING?!), the
music makes one forget about the film's many shortcomings. Nowhere near
as good as the first, but the music, choreography (especially by
Bonifant!), and songs make up for that.
 Ultimately, Blues Brothers 2000, while nothing like the first film, is
a car-crashing, toe-tapping classic that is a wonderful follow-up and a
unique, hilarious, and outrageously wonderful cult classic.

Title
Review for Gingerbread Man, The (1998)
Five words: Go see The Gingerbread Man. Yes, I DO live in Savannah, and
it was weird to see our city up there on the big screen. This film,
masterfully directed by Robert Altman, was very enjoyable, and made
Savannah look gritty and urban. Rick Magruder (played to perfection by
Kenneth Branaugh, who, of course was last seen frolicking in his own
four-hour Hamlet adaptation) is a prominent Savannah lawyer. After a
party for a recent win, Magruder meets Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz).
Her car gets stolen in the parking lot. Magruder gives her a ride home.
Soon enough, they're in bed.
Turns out that her father, Dixon Doss (Robert Duvall, in a small but
critical role) was the one that stole her car. He's the leader of a
cult-type group.Magruder subpoenas Mallory's ex-husband (Tom Berenger)
to testify against Dixon. It works. After he is arrested, and after a
quick hearing, Dixon is sent to Georgia Regional for psychiatric
treatment. Soon after, his cronies break him out of the asylum, and
pretty soon thereafter, not only is Magruder's life in danger, but his
children as well. That's when Magruder hires his woman-loving,
hard-drinking private detective friend, Clyde Pell (Robert Downey, Jr.,
who easily gets the most laughs). All of this culminates in typical and
new Altman scenes. You get everything you'd hoped for and more in this
suspense-laden film. Kudos belong to not only Branagh, but to Downey,
Jr., Embeth Davidtz, and Daryl hannah, as Lois, Magruder's assistant.
Also, the hurricane used in the film, Hurricane Geraldo, is NOT a plot
device, but an effective use of dramatic tension for the finale.All in
all, The Gingerbread Man is worth the price of admission alone. A truly
suspenseful excellently Grisham(recieves story credit for this film)
film that leaves one remembering it for a long time. 

Title
Review for Dressed to Kill (1980)
It is not very seldom that films try to imitate Hitchcock. He is after
all, one of the twentieth century's greatest motion picture directors,
perhaps even the greatest. But, however, it is far too seldom that a
film or a director pays homage to Hitchcock without fake tenure.
Brian De Palma didn't make a poor man's thriller when he co-wrote and
directed Dressed To Kill. Instead, he made a blood-chilling, nail-biting
thrill ride that would make Hitch aficionados proud.
Angie Dickinson stars as a New York woman who is trapped (so she feels)
in a boring, dead-end marriage with a boring sex life. We find all of
this information out from her frequent visits to a local psychiatrist
(Michael Caine). She lusts for a change, and gets one in a mystery man
she meets in an art museum. Not a word is spoken between the two, nor is
anything implied during this scene, but De Palam wisely let the camera
so its job and made an eerie but effective scene.
Soon after that fateful encounter, the two sleep together. A little
later, Dickinson turns up murdered, and a high-priced call girl(Nancy
Allen), a witness to the murder, is hounded by a sleazy police officer
(Dennis Franz) and the killer. Dickinson's teenage whiz kid son (Keith
Gordon) also manages to help Allen out, and even winds up saving her
life in a chillingly terrifying scene that is very Hitchcock.
TO reveal any more would ruin the film. De Palma isn;t as good as
Hitchcock, nor will he ever be. No one ever will. but this taut,
suspenseful film full of shocking moments of originality and surprising
plot twists (although the ending is predictable), is a worthy attempt
and a beautiful tribute to the master of suspense.

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
Melvin Udall is a heartless man. He spends his days inside of his
spacious Manhattan apartment writing romance novels. It also seems that
Melvin will never change. One day he dines ar his favorite restaurant,
and is a little TOO mean to his normal waitress (the only waittress that
will serve him), Carol (played to perfection by a lovely and sexy Helen
Hunt.) She threatens not to serve him if he doesn't shut up about her
asthmatic son. he does shut up. To make matters considerably worse,
Melvin has Obsessive Compulsive Disorder.
 One day his gay artist neighbor Simon(Greg Kinear, of Talk Soup fame,
in an Oscar-worthy role)'s dog threatens to dismiss himself at Melvon's
door. The dog meets the garbage chute. Soon Simon is sadly beaten by
thieveing burglars, and Ray (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), Simon's agent, takes
the dog, Verdell, to Melvin, so that Melvin can dogsit him. And through
the dog and a rather heartwrenching car trip that involves Simon, Carol,
and  himself, Melvin learns  to emerge from his cantakerous shell. Jack
Nicholson gives yet another Oscar-caliber performance as the film's
cynical lead, and is back at work, not playing a goofy U.S. president or
a comic book villian, but instead playing Jack Nicjolson, and playing
him full force. All of this adds up to this year's funniest comedy, a
creative, witty, and scathing film from James L. Brooks, and Brooks gets
award-worthy performances from the entire cast. A winner in every
aspect, and a truly delicious slice of cyncial life.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
On April 12th, 1912, the most astonishing shipwreck in the history of
the world occurred. On that fateful night, the Titanic sunk. Now, more
than 50 years later, a film has been made. And what a film that is.
 James Cameron's newest movie is a landmark in storytelling, emotion,
and special effects. It starts in the present, where Bill Paxton and his
band of scientists explore the depths of the ship's wreckage. Exploring
an old chest, PAxton comes across a nude drawing of a young woman. the
drawing is televised and the woman (Gloria Stuart) whose portrait the
painting is of comes forward and slowly but surely, the ship's story is
told.
 Leonardo DiCaprio stars as Jack Dawson, a young man with a sketch book,
a heart of gold, an intelligent mind, and not much else. he wins his
ticket aboard Titanic in a poker game, and is the perfect match for Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslett). She grows to love Jack, but seems unable
to escape the slimy clutches of her arranged fiance', Cal Hockley (Billy
Zane). the film takes its time, and by doing so, makes us care about its
characters, and shows us the full aspects of human emotion.
 The leads shine; there is no bad performance; in fact, these do not
seems like performances at all, but genuine people, trapped on the
doomed vessel, facing certain death. Watching this film, I was amazed at
how vivid and real these situations feel: The time Rose and Jack spend
together at a third-class-party; the naivety that Jack feels when he
skecthes Rose nude; the terror felt by all onboard, as certain doom
turns people into both cowards and heroes.
 This, the most expensive movie ever made, $200 million, is destined to
make its profit back, and then some. It also has more emotion and warmth
than any other film this year..even this decade.
 it is also yet another first: the first $200 million dollar romance,
and every critic in this country will agree that it was indeed, money
extremely..VERY ..well spent.
