Authors
Edward W. Felton
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Frankenstein (1994)
     After two triumphant Shakespearean adaptations, HENRY V and MUCH
ADO ABOUT NOTHING and two decently silly movies in PETER'S FRIENDS and
DEAD AGAIN, MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN is Belfast wunderkind Kenneth
Branagh's fifth film, a cautionary tale of English Roses, unnecessarily
bad stitching, and several pints of amniotic fluid.  Everyone knows the
story: giant made from corpses seeks revenge on creator, bolt in neck
and bad attitude optional.
     Branagh plays the devilishly handsome and talented Doctor
Frankenstein, brought up in idyllic Swiss home by dream parents Cheri
Lungi and Ian Holm.  Mother subsequently dies in childbirth, however,
which naturally spurs the youthful Frankenstein towards a future of
grave robbing and desecration.  There is much shaking of fists at the
sky and imploring it must not be so; off the dashing young Professor
goes to learn the medical profession, which apparently involves a great
deal of heating coloured liquid in tubes--standard mad scientist fare.
He comes under the influence of a bring-'em-back-to-life guru (a
criminally under-used John Cleese in false teeth) who soon dies,
conveniently allowing an ironic reprise of the "it must not be so"
routine.  Meanwhile, quintessential English rose Helena Bonham-Carter,
obviously on a free transfer from Merchant Ivory, does her normal
gadding about the place in frilly dresses and complicated hairdos,
wailing all the while.
     The fun starts when the monster itself is created; mayhem ensues
when Robert De Niro wakes up to find what a bad movie he's in, and that
his makeup takes hours to put on.  (Critic carefully avoids saying the
movie comes to life....)  Branagh, fitfully effective, continues to
disappoint in the direction of action scenes.  He seems happiest with
dialogue, close confrontation, and the detail to be found in faces.  In
contrasting the porcelain perfection of Bonham-Carter with the crude
baseness of the monster, Branagh has the essence of the film.  There is
too little of this, however, and what little there is is badly used:
one's attention and sympathies soon start to wander, as both
characterisation and the episodic plot are poorly developed.  Still,
some scenes work well; the initial creation of life is dramatically
effective, as are De Niro's opening scenes.
     Branagh, however thrives on words.  His two major successes had,
in William Shakespeare, the greatest screenwriter of them all.  He
struggles with this clumsy Frankenstein adaptation a real
disappointment, as there was ample opportunity in the movie for a
genuine talent (that's Branagh, by the way, not Bonham Carter) to
explore the questions that the story offers; immortality, life after
death, philosophy of the soul.  All that good stuff.  Instead, we get a
monster movie that anyone could have made.  The duality of the monster
good versus evil, newborn innocence versus primal brutality is dealt
with unforgivably crudely.  One moment, De Niro is crying after people
were rude to him, and the next he's blithely ripping out vital organs
to beat the band.  Of the few quality scenes on hand, one has the
monster being comforted by a blind farmer, played by Branagh stalwart
Richard Briers, where the anguish of Dr. Frankenstein's folly is both
touching and believable.  De Niro has enough insight and talent to
convey the monster's loneliness in this short scene, before being sent
groaning and lurching back  into this passionless script.  It's hardly
Mary Shelley's fault, although no woman who marries a man who lives on
vinegar and potatoes solely to keep his complexion clear can be
entirely without blame.
     Similar in many respects to Coppola's DRACULA (with Francis Ford
acting as executive producer on this movie) FRANKENSTEIN is
self-important, occasionally extremely gory and mildly entertaining.
And give me Emma Thompson opposite Branagh every time.  Three out of
ten.

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
     My father, bless him, has taught me two valuable lessons in life;
learn to tie your own bow ties, and steer well clear of made-for-TV
movies.  Honest advice, I thought; most TV movies seemed to feature
Jaclyn Smith or some other fading star, and almost always seemed to
have  Mommy  in the title.  However, a few years ago, a strange thing
happened; both HBO in the United States and Channel 4 in England
started coming out with carefully crafted, creatively budgeted movies
of extremely high quality.  Prominent among these was HBO's RED ROCK
WEST, an odd little film noir  that caused quite a stir when first
released.  I saw in the cinema about two years ago, as it got a
theatrical release in Europe.  A quirky tale with an excellent cast,
with Nicholas Cage as the nice guy, Dennis Hopper as the crazy bad guy
(a real stretch, presumably) and Lara Flynn Boyle as the pasty-faced
love interest.  With lots of guns, dusty country roads and fun cameos,
RED ROCK WEST was a lot of fun.  THE LAST SEDUCTION is a similar HBO
effort, but simply doesn't match it for quality.
     So basically what happens is that killer babe from hell, Linda
Fiorentino, robs her unpleasant husband of a bag of cash and goes
underground in a small town.  She stays nicely incognito, ludicrously
strutting into the redneck bar in with high heels and power
shoulder pads.  Still, we learn a great deal about her character.  She
can write backwards.  Insightful stuff.  Tumbling into the sack with
the local Brad Pitt, without the acting talent, we get what we really
came for ... cue moodily lit limbs and arched backs-a-plenty.  Irked
hubby sends heavies after her, only to be foiled by the witty, sassy
and invincible Wendy Kroy.  An hour of transparent plot devices and
tacked-on characterizations later, and nothing much has changed.
     Critics have raved over Fiorentino, describing her as both sex and
talent incarnate.  I wouldn't go that far; although certainly not
unattractive, and more than willing to get her kit off in the name of
cinema verite, she's just not that special.  Hers is a big, and
therefore admirable role for a woman, though curiously
one-dimensional.  She's tough, she's cool, she's sexy.  But then so is
Paul Newman, only he doesn't have to break out the skimpy underwear to
achieve it.  As far as I know.  Anyway, the lack of an adequate male
lead to balance the movie although this isn't so important in reverse
lessens the range of the film considerably.  Small, boring country
towns are by definition, small and boring, one wildcat in high heels
doesn't exactly set the screen on fire.  The scenes between her and the
himbo lover are laughable;  What are you running from, Wendy?   There's
some original innovative dialogue for you.  The New York scenes, merely
familiar, include that damn location under the Brooklyn Bridge, used
for the bazillionth time.  Add to that a moronic plot twist (remember
De Niro as Louis Cypher in ANGEL HEART?  Yup....) and a plethora of dull
characters, and we re checking wristwatches an hour into the film.  An
irritatingly repetitive jazz score, vaguely reminiscent of The Firm, is
constant and grinding.  Great legs emerging from car door, the sort of
thing normally smothered in a sax solo, receive the same bouncy eight
bars as the chase through a building, and hero in contemplative mood.
Fiorentino, however, has definite potential for the future, but she's
not enough to carry this movie on her own.  The conclusion, after a
tortuously convoluted final reel, the inevitable triumph of the female
will, is nicely tied up, and the movie becomes At Last Seductive: too
little, too late.  A disappointing two out of ten.
