Authors
Tom Hartman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)

It seems not a lot has changed in a hundred years...at least not in the
world of the ALIEN sequels. Somehow, Sigourney Weaver always in ends up in
a steam filled corridor, on a ship with dripping chains that swing
suspended from unseen heights for unknown reasons. The flamethrowers even
look the same, for heavenšs sake.
What has changed, are the plotlines, which went from sleeper Hollywood
hero film, to MUCH LARGER, CLASSIC HOLLYWOOD HERO FILM, to the last
installmentšs anomalya dark, brooding tale that started things off by
telling us that Ripleyšs heroic efforts at the end of part two were in
vain, then shaved her head. It got worse from there.
This outing proves to be more interesting. The technical aspects­save for
a few very hokey computer shots (beware the dreaded rolling hand
grenade!), are very good. Cinematography is sharp while keeping everything
low key, sound is excellent and the score odd, but workable. The film
panders to no one, starting things off with only the most brief sketch of
exposition, then plunging headlong into itšs sinister plot. The downside
is that the film is really for ALIEN fans...the whole thing comes off as
one large łin˛ joke. This could not be said of the brilliant łALIENS,˛
which stands on itšs own as a masterpiece of suspense.  But łALIENS˛ was a
big, huge, commercial masterpiece as well. It seems that the series last
two directors have been determined not to take that proven route, and to
search out a more low-key, oblique approach that tries hard to
achieve...dare I say...a more artistic approach. Unfortunately, these
directors seem to feel the best way to achieve this is to start off things
with a cast that looks more like a death row lineup, than a group of
characters the audience might actually care about.
The cast, though a raunchy lot, is very good. Again though, the problem
with them is that they are all such a seedy bunch that one doesnšt much
care who among them gets the olš ALIEN plunger greeting. This differs from
the first two films where each crew member had itšs share of fans pulling
for him or her. There are no łGame over man,˛ characters in this one.
Sigourney Weaver is a bit more subdued in this film...not the strong yet
still vulnerable heroine that we want to root for (EARTH TO THE
SCREENWRITERS...COME IN...), but she still makes a riveting screen
presence, the most watchable female star in decades. Nope...in this one,
we donšt worry about Ripley at all, she can handle herself. Boy, can she
handle herself.
I must admit I was not a fan of the filmšs premise...that Ripley is part
alien, part human. It belies the basic attraction she has for all of
us...she *is* us, albeit a better version of us than most of us would be
in her situations...and like all heroes from Clint Eastwood to, well,
Ripley...she doesnšt need the added attributes of an ALIEN to make her
strong or interesting. This Brundlefly approach to her character results
in a few silly scenes depicting her abnormal strength, some of which are
mildly amusing...but also results in some other less effective scenes as
in one where she puts her ear to the floor and says łItšs the Queen...and
shešs hurt...˛. The ALIEN series deserves better than this kind of hokum.
There are many action scenes, the most spectacular of which involves the
entire crew swimming underwater and holding their breaths for what seems
like an eternity while trying to reach safety on the other side of the
ship. There is a fair amount of suspense in this sequence, some great
editing, and some very impressive scoring.
Unfortunately, the pivotal turning point of the film is one of those
sequences that doom a film if enough people find it incredulous. It came
off a little bit like bad King Kong to me, but I managed to stick with it.
Worse, it is not strong enough to bring the film to its close with the
same kind of łget me off this rollercoaster!˛ sense of relief elicited in
the first two films. The ending seems flat in comparison to either of the
first two films.
With a little imagination, one senses in the final scenes that another
sequel might be in order, but if so I hope they write out this whole
Ripley as ALIEN/MOM thing. Clone her again, and do it right guys. There
are enough creeps in the universe as it is---we need a HERO, not a 50/50
BAR.
Three and a half out of Five Stars, if you must have a rating;)
