Authors
Fekr Nevisandeh
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Not Without My Daughter (1991)
     I've seen the movie, and I've read the "Reader's Digest" version of
the book which truncates the book from 400 to about 250 pages.
     Regarding the book: Reading through the passages of the book, one
can see the author's "resentment towards Iranians" (as Reza Taheri
says).  But this is understandable.  You keep somebody by force in a
strange country, subject her to beating, imprison her in the house, and
still want her to be unbiased in evaluating Iranians?
     You can see this kind of resentment in many people with some 
degree or another.  In Pakistan, for instance, the Iranian refugees
dislike Pakistanis very much.  The reason is because they are having a
hard time away from home over there.  This resentment of Betty Mahmoody
goes as far as describing  Iranian restrooms as "holes in the ground."  
     The movie, however, is more "even-handed" (though not quite).  The
movie starts with a beautiful scenery of a green forest by a small lake.
The birds are singing and the atmosphere is peaceful and relaxed.  By
the lake there is a summer house....  If you have not read the book but
know the movie is about Iran, you are led to believe the scene is in
Iran.  Then you see the title "Alpha, Michigan, 1984...."  Anyway, I
shouldn't spoil the movie for those who want to see it.
     I found that part of the movie which was supposed to show Iran
quite accurate with exception of some technical points.  Right after
getting out of "Mehr Abad" airport, Moody is surrounded by his
Hezbollahi family, and at their arrival at the house the family
sacrifices a sheep for them, a common practice in Iran.  Later in some
other scene a car belonging to revolutionary guards stops and four
people, two men and two women jump out of the car with machine guns
swearing at Betty for not covering all of her hair.  This was perhaps
the most realistic scene in the movie.
     Some parts of the movie is exaggerated.  For example, in one scene
they showed an old crumbling building which was supposed to be Hosseyie
Ershad.  I have seen the mosque with its marble floor and beautiful
Persian carpets.  That old building did not at all resemble Hosseynie
Ershad.  The other exaggeration was the sheep on the streets of Tehran.
The viewer could see them up to the end of the movie.  A big portion of
the movie is concentrated on Betty's escape; therefore, it shows some
Iranian heroes who help her escape.  One other thing about the film: the
guy who was playing the husband was not Iranian, and it was sort of
funny for Iranian audience to see him speak Persian.
     Dave Elliott, our fellow netter, writes about the movie: "The
culture is presented as simply being very different than American
culture, not better or worse."  What is Iranian culture?  Do we have a
homogeneous entity as Iranian culture?  I don't think so.  First we
have diverse ethnic groups such as Turks, Kurds, Turkmans, Baluchies,
Arabs, Lors, etc.  Each group has its own culture which might be similar
to others in some aspects, yet it might be different from the rest in
other aspects.
     Second, in any ethnic group or even cities we have (what I may
call) sub_cultures.  For example, in Tehran the culture of southern 
part of the city is far different from that of the northern residents.
Yet another category might be the difference between religious and
non-religious people in the same city.  A marriage between a religious
and a non-religious party especially after the revolution could be
disastrous.
     I've met some of my fellow Iranians who call Mrs. Mahmoody a liar
and some other names.  Then we see on the net, "I have not seen the
movie and most probably will not either" and, "I am very happy that this
movie, NOT WITHOUT MY DAUGHTER, might function as a tool to increase our
awareness and sensitivity toward the dirty face of subtle and yet real
vilification of all Iranians along a same line as Arabs, Hispanics, and
other ethnic groups.  We must be aware of these movies, T.V. programs."
     I'm afraid the solution is not "not seeing the movie," but this
movie might function as a tool to increase our awareness of the dirty
parts to *our culture(s)* (yes, they exist).  Unfortunately there are
thousands of Iranian women who are beaten by their husbands, and have,
unlike Mrs. Mahmoody, nowhere to go.  Let us have some self-criticism
of our culture(s) and ourselves.  Let us not get so defensive and let us
admit the dark parts of our culture(s) and try to overcome and evolve
them for the benefit of the next Iranian generations.
[BTW: The account "fekr nevisandeh" translates to "the thought of the writer"
and is an anonymous posting facility.  -Moderator]
