Authors
Brian Nelson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Secret of Roan Inish, The (1994)
[Originally posted to rec.music.celtic.]
     I highly recommend the new film release THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH.
     This Irish production is the story of a young girl and her family
as they struggle with moving from the simple life of an island fishing
village interlaced with superstition and old tails of the families
involvement with selkies.  The selkies are mythical creatures who are
humans and seals in one.  The story is at once simple and complex and
all the while enthralling.
     Visually the film carries the rugged and often bleak look of the
Irish coast.  What one reviewer called "moody ... and hard to warm up
to," I found it reflective of the hard lives of people in a hard land.
While the film may be slow and lack action and color by American
film-going standard, it is a wonderfully crafted tail well worth
seeing.
     By far the most striking feature of the film to me and my wife was
the music.  That is why I am posting a film review here in
rec.music.celtic.  The film is filled with the most masterful and yet
subtle Celtic music.  The gentle background of whistle, flute, strings
and bodhran, along with other instruments may melt into a mood for the
average viewer, but the virtuoso performances will be breathtaking to
the those of us familiar with the genera.  Of particular note is the
bodhran playing throughout.  Take time to stay for the final credits
and be rewarded with a percussion composition featuring two sets of
bones and one or several bodhrans, not to be missed.
     The credits listed a number of individual musicians whose name, I
am sorry to say, I did not catch.  No performing group was noted
outside of the Irish Film Orchestra.  I saw no notice of a soundtrack
album, but I will be searching to find one if it exists. If anyone has
information on such an album please notify me by e-mail.
     This is a fine Irish film all will enjoy, particularly those of us
with a Celtic tilt of mind.
