Authors
Ron Lawrence
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     Out of all the reviews I have read of this movie, I would have to
say that nine out of ten panned it and that remaining one slept through
it.
     First of all, Stone is trying to point out exactly what goes on in
the media today in regards to how it effects people.  The main focus is
on violence.  The problem is since a movie is a form of media Stone ran
into the problem of glorifying violence while he was satirizing it.  It
is hard to ridicule violence in the magnitude that it is portrayed in
the media today with, without glorifying it yourself.
     I found when I left the movie that the violent scenes really did
not affect me that much because I was so used to seeing that kind of
violence in the media before this movie.
     This movie was a masterpiece.  It was extremely clever and
conveyed many points across.  Yes, some scenes were exaggerated and not
true to life, but sometimes you need to step out of the lines to get
your point across.  The camera angles, use of color, animation, and
flashbacks made this movie a new and interesting experience for my
eyes.  Harrelson and Lewis did excellent jobs.  I think Jones'
character could have been developed a little more, but his nose
pinchers provided a good laugh.
     Downey Jr. also did a wonderful job.  I thought Stone's portrayal
of these sensationalistic crime shows was very accurate and not
exaggerated at all.  I wouldn't be surprised if in the near future an
anchor actually participated in a murder just to get ratings.
     You could say this is a biased review since Stone is my favorite
director.  This movie made me feel less of him as a person though.  It
seemed that he thought he was the one exception to the media glorifying
violence.  After reading some reviews it came across to me that Stone
is very high on himself because he feels he sees things others do not.
