Authors
Michael Stoneheel
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Peter's Friends (1992)
     After Kenneth Branagh first film several critics compared him to 
Lawrence Olivier.  After his second film he was compared to Orson 
Welles.  What next?
     Personally, I liked his first two films.  I thought he was an
excellent actor but I didn't find any greatness in his directing.
Knowing his intention to imitate other films, I expected a British
version of THE BIG CHILL.
     Actually PETER'S FRIENDS is a mixture of "Thirty Something" and 
"Are You Being Served?".  It is a sentimental dramatic comedy (what a 
disturbing term) written by Rita Rudner and Branagh concerning a reunion
of friends after ten years.
     The film begins with several cinematographic experiments.  Branagh
used home-video photographing style to show the main characters' last
meeting at 1982 (he was probably influenced by Woody Allen).  This
method can irritate the audience, create an authentic atmosphere, and
give an impression of another objective character (namely the
camera)--none has been achieved!
     Afterwards, a sequence of events from the 80's is presented with
some documentary effect.  The arrival of all the friends to Peter's home
could be considered as the only brilliant scene of the film.  It is
fast, funny, sarcastic and accurate.  From this point the film
circulates between a tedious melodrama and comedy.  Several jokes in
the film made me laugh (and it is very difficult during the last years)
but some of the gags were used too much (for example, the laughter of
Tony Slattery).  The sentimental scenes are boring and it would have
been better off without some of them.
     The only thing left is to expect a good performance from such fine
actors, well, forget it!  Hugh Laurie and Imelda Staunton are annoying,
Rita Rudner gives the best performance but when we understand it she is
gone, Stephen Fry and Emma Thompson are reasonably good and Branagh is
excellent in the start but soon he becomes too self-conscious with his
acting.  The main problem is that the actors do not relate to each
other.  What could have been a perfect ensemble turned to be a complete
chaos.
     This film is another proof that Branagh hasn't understood the
cinema media yet.  The script is suitable for television and not for
cinema, the casting is not balanced and the cinematography has no
effect.  The only comfort is that due to Branagh's talent the film is
mediocre but not bad!

Title
Review for Dressed to Kill (1980)
Director: Brian De Palma
Cast: Michael Caine, Angie Dickinson, Nancy Allen, Keith Gordon
Released in 1980.
     A sexually active woman is brutally murdered.  Her son, a hooker
who was a witness to the murder and the victim's psychiatrist are
looking for the killer.  The main characters cope with terror, fear,
violence and sex until the mystery is solved.
     Brian De Palma is usually being accused of borrowing his ideas from
Alfred Hitchcock.  Using such opinions, this film is a mixture of a
Hitchcock suspense film and an erotic horror movie.  Personally, I think
that De Palma was also influenced by several realistic directors and by
Louis Bunuel.  Violence and sex are being used as the surface of the
film.  In a higher level De Palma is looking for the connection between
the senses and our behavior.  Aesthetically, the film is focused on the
relation between what we see and what we think and feel.  I will
describe two scenes to clarify my ideas.
     On the first scene, Angie Dickinson is sitting near a stranger in a
museum.  She desires him but in the same time she fears to approach him.
This common conflict is being illustrated by the way she looks at the
world.  When she wants the stranger she glances at him, and then she
immediately turns her head to the other direction.  After he is gone,
she is determined to find him.  She tries to follow him and looks at
every direction.  When she finally finds him in a position she wasn't
expected him to be, she decides to forget the whole thing.  The scene
continues in the same manner and the spectators see exactly what the
woman see, and also the expressions on her face.  The simple
interpretation of feelings and thoughts is due to the crucial importance
of the sense of sight in our lives.  In fact, what wee see is what we
think and vice versa.
     On the second scene, the hooker explains the boy how to perform a
sex conversion.  On the background several women conduct their own
discussion.  Every time the hooker completes a sentence, the first woman
on the background says yes to a woman we cannot see.  The second woman
on the background seems to catch on some of the hooker words, and she
reacts in a wide expression of shocking and surprise.  The difference
between both reactions makes this situation funny for the spectator who
understands that the sight of the background can be misleading.
     Although DRESSED TO KILL combines several styles, the film is
essentially realistic.  Except from the realistic sex and violence
scenes, De Palma has used several cinematography methods.  The
tremendous use of slow panning shots increases the importance of vision
and gives the audience more time to look at things and to respond by
creating emotions.  Another interesting method is the splitting of the
screen into two simultaneous scenes.  As a result, the spectator has to
choose what to see (It has the same realistic effect as deep-focus
shots).  The nightmares in the film are so real that it is not clear if
they are dreams or just thoughts.
     In the film, life is consisted of sights, thoughts, feelings and
nightmares which are being summed up to sex, violence and love.  Due to
the relations between feelings and visions, the spectator can reach a
better understanding by looking at things from "within the scene".  As a
result, the spectator becomes another participant in the film.  In my
opinion, a perfect harmony between the theme, aesthetics and
metaphysics along with excellent cinematography and acting turned into
a true masterpiece.
