Authors
Joseph Brenner
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Highway 61 (1991)
     HIGHWAY 61 is an attempt at being charming in a cult film sort of
way that never really comes off.  The story is very similar to, say,
SOMETHING WILD, and easily a dozen other films: a geeky but nice guy
meets a wild woman hot babe who gets him involved with some weird
happenings, and eventually they fall in love.  I'd rate it around -1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
     In this case, our hero the geek is a barber in Canada who has
pretensions of being a trumpet player (he's awful).  He discovers a body
lying in his back yard.  Our hero the wild woman (well, really the woman
in this kind of story is more of an archetypal image than a hero), is a
heavy metal roadie who decides to claim the body, so she can use it to
smuggle some stolen cocaine into the US.  She manages to con our hero
into giving her a lift, so they strap the coffin on top of his Ford
Galaxie, and off they go down Route 61.  
     First demerit: none of this makes any sense.  More importantly, the
nonsense isn't particularly engaging in any way, it's just there.
     The third character is the most interesting one, a guy who thinks
he's Satan, who goes around talking people into selling him their souls.
The joke is that they almost always do it for something really trivial,
because they don't take him seriously.  As you might expect, there's
some ambiguity about whether or not he's really Satan, but mostly he
just seems to be a nut.  He wants the body our heroes are schlepping
around.
     There are also some dissolute ex-rock stars that are friends of the
wild woman, who engage in some degenerate activity that might be mildly
amusing.  
     The "surprising" conclusion to this movie makes even less sense
than the beginning, and it's even more unsatisfying.  It's supposed to
be ironic and show some sort of change of character on the part of the
female character, but it comes out of nowhere, and it doesn't really
mean anything.
     So, there's an occasional funny line in this movie, and some minor
sound and fury near the end that might draw you in, but it all seems too
silly to matter, and it just doesn't go anywhere.
     Incidentally, there is a little Bob Dylan on the sound track, but
it's not the title cut, and it's probably just as well.

Title
Review for Tetsuo (1988)
     A Japanese, arty flick, which supposedly uses horror movie tropes
to make some sort of cyberpunk comment on modern culture.  It's got some
moments, but it's mostly just dull and stupid.
     To understand the plot of this movie, it helps a lot to read one of
the newspaper reviews that are floating around.  There's nothing
particularly deep about it, but the movie isn't very good at
communicating what's supposed to be happening: a "metal fetishist"
inserts a piece of rusty metal tubing into his leg, freaks out and runs
in front of a car which is being driven by a "salary man" and his girl
friend.  The salary man then seems to be infected with some sort of
disease that progressively transforms him into metal.  The thankfully
black and white look of this movie, involves various disgusting looking
chaotic masses of old machine parts protruding from peoples bodies (like
VIDEODROME, but not done as well).  
     In the only scene that's worth anything in the movie, the "salary
man" undergoes the bulk of his transformation into metal while making
love with his girlfriend.  At first it seems like they might do
something interesting with it (she says something like "No, show it to
me.  I don't frighten easily."), but it degenerates into the usual
horror movie hysterics (a suggestion for directors: prevent the actors
from screaming, using gags if necessary).  Anyway, he emerges from
hiding covered in metal, his penis transformed into a huge power drill.
They spend some time running around, fighting.  While she has him
briefly subdued, there's a hint that she's turned on by his new body,
but he kills her with his cool new tool.  It isn't clear if she meant
for this to happen, but if you believe the reviews she "dies in
ecstasy."
     I might excuse the excesses and clumsiness of this movie if I
thought they really had something worthwhile to say, but they just
don't.  This whole business about the transformation "just happening"
like some sort of disease is dumb any way you look at it.  Cyberpunk is
about turning yourself into a monster *on purpose*, not by accident.
And this general theme of technology being out of control, an
implacable, inhuman force ... it isn't just wrong, it's old and stale
too.
     (Oh, the music is pretty good though.  If you're into moody
industrial music, you might want to check out the sound track.  For that
matter, this movie would probably be okay as a dance club light show).  
