Authors
Dale Shin
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Universal Soldier (1992)
     I saw the previews and I was psyched to see it, so I did.  Like all
the movies I've seen this summer, I expected too much and got
disappointed from the real thing.  
     Jean Claude and Dolph are soldiers in Vietnam.  They kill each
other because of Van Damme's "Casualties of War" morality and Dolph's
"Apocalypse Now" freakiness.  Resurrected as Universal Soldiers, they
are badder than Navy Seals, the Green Berets rolled into one.  Certain
similar situations they face on their missions arouse some strange sense
of familiarity in Van Damme.  Ultimately he breaks out and all of a
sudden becomes a weird mix of human-robot, robot-human.  A nosy
reporter's life is threatened so Van Damme takes off with her to protect
her and slowly Dolph starts to revert back to his heart of darkness,
which means he must chase down Van Damme and kill him.  
     There are some funny moments in the film and some okay acting.  The
fight scenes are okay as all fight scenes always look staged.  The
technical side of the story as in details of their robotness etc., is
okay although not substantial enough to seem truly credible.  Much of
Van Damme and Dolph's behaviors have holes in it.  At one point they
seem to be totally human again, but the next minute they are restrained
by their robotness.  And they are rather quick to all of a sudden to get
their memory back.  
     This is an okay movie.  The composition, effects, etc.  and its
weaknesses don't make it worth it to see on a big screen for six
dollars, so wait for video.
