Authors
Mike Gaines
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     It's not a documentary; it's not a drama.  This is the docudrama
from Ron Howard who brought us BACKDRAFT, PARENTHOOD, and FAR AND
AWAY.  I think that this is one of the best movies to come out this
summer and I hope that people go see this instead of JUDGE DREDD.  What
makes this movie stand out above the others is that it's a wonderful
story, *and* it actually happened!  Part of the reason why movies have
been getting worse is that the stories have become so unbelievable that
they've become parodies of themselves.  This movie laughs *at* the
others.
     Not one person in this movie was miscast.  Tom Hanks will not win
an Oscar for his role this year; the movie was not built as an Oscar
vehicle.  Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Ed Harris and Kathleen Quinlan
portray their characters beautifully and realistically.  Ron Howard
does turn up the emotion level a tinge high at the end, but besides
that he does a remarkable job of making the movie seem as much of a
documentary as he can.  The computer graphics and the zero-gravity
footage from the Vomit Comet are beautiful.
     There are some Hollywood-isms that I had a hard time swallowing.
First was when Jim Lovell's car wouldn't start; second was when the
overhead projector at Mission Control died for no apparent reason;
third was when Jim's wife lost her wedding ring in the shower.  All
these little scenes showing bits of bad luck to the characters in the
film didn't seem to move the story along.  The only problem is that you
can't tell if these things actually happened or if they were written
into the script just for the sake of showing the bad luck that was
happening to all the characters that week in April, 1970.  I'm almost
embarrassed to admit that I don't know myself after studying astronomy
for so long, but I don't know the details of this Apollo mission in
detail.
