Authors
Brandi Weed
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Nightmare Before Christmas, The (1993)
     Since I live not too far from Los Angeles (and the El Capitan),
I've had the good fortune to see THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS this
weekend.
     Okay, let's get the bad news out of the way first.  The film is
only 75 minutes long, so some things which are set up are never very
well explained; similarly, the plot is rather thin (but I've seen
thinner films do well--HOME ALONE 2, anyone?).  Ideally, this film
should have been 90-100 minutes long.
     Now the good news: It's a genuinely likable film, grotesque and
heart-warming at the same time (don't ask me to explain how they pull
it off).  It's also very funny, with great ghoulish sendups of
Christmas sentiment and a surprise reference to The Fly (I'll let you
experience that yourself!).  The animation is terrific, and you may end
up seeing it twice (as I did) just to look at some of the wackier
character designs.
     The score by Danny Elfman is decent (people who've complained
about his "la-la-la" tendency can complain again), and so are the
songs, which are definitely influenced by/stolen from Kurt Weill.
Three songs in particular stand out:  the opening song about
Halloweentown (which could be easily used as a new score for
Disneyland's Haunted House), a song sung by three nasty little urchins
about kidnapping Santa (sample lyric: "Kidnap Santa Claus/Stuff him in
a box/Lock him up for 90 years/and see if he'll talk!"), and a Cab
Calloway-esque number by the film's nominal villain Oogie Boogie (who
also has a few really eye-popping scenes of animation).
     On the whole, I'd say it's definitely one of the better Tim Burton
films (he did not direct, but he seems to have come up with the story
and the main character designs), and probably ties with EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS for being his best film.  It'll be in wide release this
Friday (the 22nd): go see it!
