Authors
paul@discordia.org (Paul)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
     It's been ages since I last saw a Bond film.  I think the last one
I saw was Dalton's first Bond film.  Pierce Brosnan is a major
improvement over Dalton.  Dalton was cold, angst ridden, and serious.
While this personality is probably closer to reality, Bond films have
never been very realistic.  They are in fact, very silly, with
megalomaniac villains who wants to take over/destroy the world.  Bond
is constantly being placed into "escape-proof" death traps which he
eventually escapes.  The appeal of Bond is his bad boy image.  Brosnan
restore some of that fun image to the character that Dalton had wore
away.
     Plot-wise, the film is unoriginal.  Bond must save the world once
again from a doomsday device, the Goldeneye, a weapon that can destroy
all electronics.  But people don't see Bond film for their plot, they
see Bond films for familar things like beautiful women, fast cars,
megalomania villains, and shopping trips at Q's.  Even if the plot is
rather predictable, there's enough action in the film to keep you from
falling asleep.
     The villain this time is 006, played by Sean Bean, who also act as
an angst generator because he was once Bond's best friend.  Rounding
out the villains list is Femke Janssen, who played a villainess who
likes to squeeze men to death between her legs (no, I am not kidding).
     What's interesting about the movie is that while bond has changed
very little (he still sleeps around, and drink Martini shaken but not
stirred), the world around him have changed considerably.  The women
are more assertive, and independent.  Bond's boss is now a woman who
tells Bond that he is a sexist relic of the cold war.  His female
co-star is constantly criticizing him about his "boys with toy"
attitude.  Moneypenny has  a life outside of the office.  In
some ways, James Bond is kind of like the super-hero mythos, constantly
being updated while remaining the same.
     Bond fans will not want to miss this movie.  For others, it's
worth a look if you're looking for a fun movie that you can watch with
half of your brain disconnected.
