Authors
Messier
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Max Messier.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/8fd516580062d1448825684300090f19?OpenDocument
When the lights go down--the manwhore comes out to play
When I watch certain actors paint such vivid and animated characters
across the silver screen, I am almost reach a state of pure cinema
bliss.  I came close to that bliss when I watched the riveting Richard
Gere is his latest film, American Gigolo 2, Male Gigolo.  Gere has such
a powerful presence in a number of memorable moments that draw from him
an almost frightening realism that seems to reach out from the screen to
the audience.  Richard Gere's performance in the film--oh, wait a
minute--let me retract that last statement.  Did I say Richard Gere?
Sorry for the confusion perplexed individuals. I meant the new film
Deuce Bigalow, Male Gigolo.  Gere and Schneider, I tend to mix up the
two so often.
Deuce Bigalow, Male Gigolo, always a bridesmaid but never a bride.  The
new comedy co-written and starring Rob Schneider has been designed
specifically for the current style of comedic filmmaking made popular
years ago with Porky's and Hot Dog: The Movie.  The "stereotypical,
drunken, convoluted, skit humor pressed into ninety minutes" style.
Following in the vein of Adam Sandler (who is one of the co-producers of
Deuce Bigalow) and numerous Lorne Michael's films, Deuce tries to
capture those hilarious situations made famous by its predecessors but
ends up feeling forced and limited.  It lacked fluidity to the pace of
the film and seems to rely too much on the physical size of Schneider as
a comedic vehicle.
The set-up is simple and if handled properly, it could have produced
memorable moments that seem to dominate the current comedic films of
recent.  The problem is that Schneider restores to using situations will
very bland, stereotypical characterization that only work for about five
to ten minutes, such as a skit on SNL or MadTV, and never seems to
extend to a further point.  The Farrelly bros. used to same premise in
their films but was able to extend those characters into interesting and
complying characters.  Certain situations succeed in capturing very
funny moments but overall, the jokes are hit and miss.
The supporting cast includes Eddie Griffin, of the "Malcolm and Eddie"
television show, who supplies Deuce with the proper connections into the
world of the "manwhore."  I wouldn't be surprised to see Griffin's
character spinning off to his own television show, "Malcolm and the
ManPimp," which no doubt would be picked up by either the WB or UPN in a
heartbeat.  The versatile actor, William Forsythe, provides his Method
acting made famous by his performances in Dick Tracy and Firestorm, to
the role of the main adversary against Deuce who has a small problem
below the waist, which he reveals too many times.  Forsythe, call your
agent and tell him to please get you out of the career path made famous
by Gary Busey pronto.
The efforts of Scheinder in producing a successful comedy for the masses
are recognizable but his story structure and character development is
unoriginal and predictable.  The last thing I would want is another
romantic comedy about learning to love someone for who they are.  Years
ago, I saw Rob Schneider at a comedy club and everything he did was
brilliant and original, almost Kaufmanesque.  His work on SNL was
impressive and ranked with the works of the Belushi and Farrelly caliber
of comedy.  That individual who I saw years ago can make you laugh.  But
with this film, Schneider only succeeds in scratching the surface of his
comedic talents.
