Authors
John Walker
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for War, The (1994)
In brief: In a bizarre way, I like THE WAR a lot--but for something
     other folks don't seem to have noticed.  I think that's because
     there are two different movies here.  As *talk*, THE WAR is an
     anti-war message piece with supporting subplots; its message is,
     "War makes us crazy."
     Most people seem to have noticed only the talk.  Which is
     strange--doesn't the *action* count?  It's as if even the
     film makers--director Jon Avnet and screenwriter Kathy McWorter,
     in particular--were unaware of the underlying message.
     It's 1970 in dirt-poor Juliette, Mississippi.  The center of THE
WAR is Stu Simmons (Elijah Wood).  But he is crowded around with family
members whose stories are major subplots, all interlocked.  The most
important is his father Stephen (Kevin Costner).  Stephen is a Viet Nam
veteran who couldn't hold a job after returning.  He's back with the
family again after being hospitalized for recurring nightmares.  One
strand in THE WAR is Stephen's interaction with his children and his
warning against the dangers of violence--that in war, we go crazy, we
do things we'll be ashamed of.
     While Stephen was in the Nam, the family lost their house to
termites and County condemnation.  Now they live in a tiny, sort of
squalid little cottage, not much better than a shack, with other
similar houses crammed together cheek-by-jowl.  Stu's mother Lois (Mare
Winningham) holds the family together working two jobs.
     There's also Stu's sister--the film's narrator--Lidia (Lexi
Randall).  If you've seen the trailers, you know that her theme is
racial harmony.  She accepts her two black friends, Elvadine (LaToya
Chisholm) and Amber (Charlette Julius), as equals, and stands up for
them against a segregation-minded summer-school teacher, Miss Strapford
(Christine Baranski).
     But the main theme is Stu--and his tree fort.  Lidia and her
friends have gotten the materials for it, and he'll build it with them
and his two friends, Chet (Adam Henderson) and Marsh (Brennan
Gallagher).  Unfortunately, the girls got the materials from the
junkyard of a local drunk, Mr. Lipnicki (Raynor Scheine), whose six
kids are apparently the local bullies and thugs.  When they find out,
we'll have The War for which THE WAR is named.
     If you've seen any reviews or previews, you should already know
whether THE WAR will likely turn you off.  If you can't stand sermons,
you're in trouble.
     The trailer shows that Miss Strapford has put the black kids in
the back.  And it gives us Lidia's sermon on the subject.  I have no
problem with a 12-year-old *feeling* the way Lidia did.  But (except
for the rustic grammar) being able to give that speech would mean that
momma and poppa were profs at the local college.  (The sermon-sensitive
can be reassured on one point, though: This is *not* a hate letter to
the South.  Miss Strapford is the only one who really drags race in,
and she's more dorky than malicious.)
     Costner, too, has lines that smack of college followed by years
writing editorials for the crusading small-town weekly newspaper
beloved of film makers in the 30s and 40s.  He's Will Rogers updated and
suspicious of violence in all forms.  He's the peaceable guy in the
western who saves the town from the bad guys.
     Momma doesn't have too many lines, but she could be a saint in
some 30s/40s film about farm workers or factory help.  She's the rock
of strength who's still thoroughly womanly.  It may be 1970, but mom
and dad remind me of Depression-era photos from the Farm Security
Administration.  And their speeches and sermons have attracted the most
attention.
     But *Stu* is the center of THE WAR.  And it's as if Stu's role was
written separately from those of the others.  Stu seems more real.
True, he's more rough-hewn eloquent than any 12-year-old I've ever
known.  True, he has major "speeches".  But they seem to arise out of
his character rather than out of a political tract.  He is saying what
he's feeling rather than informing others what they ought to feel or
do.
     The only other characters who struck me as real were the Lipnicki
kids.  (By the way, like Stu, *they don't give sermons*.)  It's like
McWorter had really seen something like this as a kid, and then years
later added in other characters and events to make the "meaning" clear.
     Is the *acting* why I find Stu believable, but not the rest?  Wood
is just massively talented, after all.  He makes even his "speeches"
real and moving.  Maybe he just did a 12-year-old boy better than
Costner, Winningham, and Randall did their roles.
     Unfortunately, I can't imagine *anyone* being able to handle some
of their lines without seeming preachy.  Take one of Stephen's comments
to Stu:
     In fact (if you're not sermon-allergic), Costner made even the
sermons seem real.  And at the end of a confrontation with Lipnicki, he
didn't even seem preachy.
     But I said there were two stories in THE WAR.  If the vocal one is
the sermons, what about the underlying one?
     Practically from word one, I was at a distance from THE WAR.
*Everyone* speaks Southern.  My background is small-town, but it's
small-town Rhode Island.  I haven't dealt with people with
"un-colleged" Southern accents since I was in the Navy.  (And they
didn't do sermons.)
     Maybe it was the slight culture shock that made me compare the
rules of my own kidhood with how things worked in THE WAR.  The
Lipnickis say Stu's trespassing on "their" land near the junkyard.  But
is it theirs?  Lidia says they're squatters even on the junkyard
itself.  And there's stuff in the junkyard from the Simmons's condemned
house.  Nonetheless, with Lidia is a thoroughly calculating kid, and
with her decision to heist stuff from the junkyard, she crossed a major
boundary.
     Suburbanization has been less destructive in Rhode Island than
elsewhere.  Even today, a "Private" or "No Trespassing" sign strikes me
as profoundly bad taste.  As a kid I went wherever I went, and so did
all the other kids.  But once someone put that sign up, it was to be
respected (or violated with only the greatest caution and suitable
guilt if caught).  People who put up such signs might be paranoid
jerks.  But it was *their* property.  That was that.
     So also junkyards.  It might be worthless trash, but it was
*their* worthless trash.  (Junkyards can still be still a *cause
celebre* back home--the owners are seen as the victims of new
suburbanites who want to drive out those who were there first.)
     Without much context, I mentioned the property-right proscriptions
of small-town Rhode Island to a friend.  He groaned.  It seemed rigid,
puritanical, unrealistic.
     But stop and think--if those rules had been observed, the War in
THE WAR would never have happened.
     Can we have an anti-war film that doesn't ask how wars *start*?
*The War* never gives a sermon about trespass, about turf battles,
about the ambiguities of squatters, about filching junk--but without
them, there would have been no film.
     Now, a story.  A friend in my Reserve unit was a pacifist.  (He'd
already been on active duty: real life has its paradoxes!)  He was in
college and working in a factory to pay bills.  There was this one guy
who just harassed him endlessly--I mean, a college kid, a pacifist,
why not?  So, finally, my friend decked him.  After that, the other guy
was his best friend at work!
     (Understanding the guy was an intellectual problem for my friend,
matching the moral problem he had with decking him.)
     I'll give no spoilers about THE WAR, but I'll say that we don't
get the tidy outcome my friend did.  Nonetheless, the usefulness --
even the *need*--of standing up and fighting for what's *yours* is an
absolutely essential element in THE WAR--for *both* Stu and the
Lipnickis.
     And the Lipnicki kids are sort of like that factory worker.
They're not necessarily bad kids; they're probably better than we might
expect them to be, considering their father.  They're thugs, sort of,
but are they really bullies?  We don't see them seeking smaller kids to
pick on; it's more that they run roughshod, that they go too far with a
grudge.
     THE WAR appears to be very deliberately written.  As *talk*, all
the threads are tied together; there are no loose ends.  Everything is
explained.  To which my response is a polite, "That's nice."
     But the *action*, the story about Stu and the Lipnicki kids is
*all* loose ends.  We don't know how it began.  We don't get a speech
from Stu explaining all his motives.  (Not that we need any.)  We don't
know how Stu and the Lipnickis viewed each other or their war
afterward.  We don't know what they "did with it".
     The underlying story is live and real.  It asks why we get into
messes with each other.  For me, it demands we ask whether dour
small-towners might have figured out a way to avoid a lot of nastiness.
     It also asks what we do when when people go too far.  Yes, it
intersects with the talk in warning that the violence is risky--don't
let it get out of hand.  (It might be interesting to consider whether
the *action* of THE WAR could serve as an allegory of U.S. involvement
in Viet Nam.)
     In any event, the story of the action isn't a sermon; it's a
challenge.  It doesn't come back with a clear answer.

Title
Review for Josh and S.A.M. (1993)
     "Expectations" may be an obsession of mine, but I'll say it:  *If
you can park virtually every expectation at the door*, this will be a
flick that can become addictive.
     It will hit you on more levels than most three other movies.  It's
a romp--the sort of thing lots of us wanted to do as kids--screw
everything, grab a car, and beat it for the border.  It's an
adventure--where the stakes are high, and the hero must play everything
right or face disaster.  It's a comedy--where adults are somewhat
silly, and two kids create their own universe.  It's sort of like a
horror story, but without magic or the supernatural--where the demons
are utterly ordinary people doing ordinary sorts of things.  And it's a
morality play--where the hero has to face himself and his own actions.
     But if you can't park the expectations, you may very well hit a
wall with this film.  Others have.
     Josh (Jacob Tierney), a 12-year-old or so, and Sam (Noah Fleiss),
8 or so, are brothers.  Their parents (Stephen Tobolowsky and Joan
Allen) are divorced.  Sam is sweet kid, a natural jock, and bright--but
withdrawn.  The other kids call him "Robot" and "Alien".  Josh is one
of those kids who has given the word "hacker" a bad name.  Besides the
usual computer stuff, he duplicates credit-card magnetic strips to use
the accounts of his mother's boyfriend.
     Josh also lies a lot.  After the kids get sent to the father's for
the end of the summer, Josh's opening gambit (besides previous stories
about the boyfriend) is to tell Sam that he (Sam) is really a
Strategically Altered Mutant (S.A.M.), and to generate documents to
"prove" it.  Sam believes it--and the further lies that he's set to
be sold to the Pentagon to be a child warrior and that his only hope is
to escape to Canada.
     When the two are going to be suddenly shuttled back to Mom for a
farewell because she's leaving for Europe and dumping them with Dad for
a year, Josh embarks on still further lies, that lead to mistaken/fake
identity, and a crunch where he has to kill a violent drunk (Chris
Penn).  (At least Josh thinks he's killed him; he can't find a pulse.)
     In any event, now they *both* have reason to clear the territory.
They steal the drunk's rental car and make their move.  Along the way,
they'll pick up a friendly hitch-hiker, Alison (Martha Plimpton).  But
it ain't gonna be smooth sailing.
     When I talk to anyone about a movie, I try to think of two things:
what did I go through in seeing the flick, and what do I think other
people will do.  I'd like to flag things things that I think others
have missed, either to warn people of a negative *before* they go, or
to point out something that might be attractive.
     Before I saw JOSH AND S.A.M., I had signals from two quarters:  1)
Stanley Drew Rosenbaum (rosenbau@ucsu.Colorado.EDU); and 2) the reviews
of a) James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) and b) Scott Renshaw,
Stanford University (AS.IDC@forsythe.stanford.edu (IDC Database)).
     Rosenbaum seemed to be describing JOSH AND S.A.M. as what I'd call
"a romp"--fun, plain and simple.  (I refer you to "The JOSH and
S.A.M. Audience Participation Guide 1.2" rec.arts.movies thread, among
others.)
     Well, I'd give a note of caution there.  (I'd caution you about
doing the Guide's "vocal" parts in a first-run theater!)  After the
movie jelled, I was wired throughout it.  It wasn't simply a nifty
comedy.  For me, it was an adventure.
     The only image I have is that it was like falling onto a sled in
winter and going down a totally new hill.  In one sense, you're in
complete control: turn left, turn right, shift your weight here, drag
your foot just a little bit there, the sled goes where you tell it.
But there are rocks and trees everywhere, and you can't see very far
ahead.
     The one thing you can never do is *stop*.  Try, and body parts
will be decorating the landscape.  All you can do is hope that the
trail you're making doesn't go off a ledge somewhere, or smack into a
dead-end rock.
     One test of a movie is whether my attention wanders, whether I
think of other stuff while it's running.  Two ideas came up, one right
after another--only a few times, and JOSH AND S.A.M.  immediately got
my attention again.  The *second* thing was "What's gonna happen?!
How's it gonna *end*!?"  I could only see terror and disaster.  That is
*not* what I think of during a light comedy!  (Maybe I have a problem
with getting into films too easily.)
     So, I think I'll use the Guide for *later* viewings, when I'm not
so wired.  (Let it be noted, however, that if I go to a theater that
sells hot dogs, it will be positively disloyal not to buy one or two!
Candy bars just won't cut it.  Also, the half-pepperoni, half-pineapple
pizza *has* acquired a permanent significance.  It has only a small
role in the film, but I will nonetheless concede to Rosenbaum that it
must now be regarded as a cultural icon!)
     But I said that my fear of the end was the *second* thing--what
was the first?  It was "they [meaning: lots of you folks] are *not*
gonna believe this."  The closest I could come to finding a neutral
term to describe why was "a pervasive air of unreality".  And I don't
like that term, because in some sense, this film is completely
realistic--after you concede *one* premise.
     Although I disagree with their conclusions, I have to thank both
Berardinelli and Renshaw for stating the real problem very clearly:
Berardinelli:
>How much are you willing to suspend your disbelief?  In the answer to
>that question lies the degree to which you'll buy into the underlying
>premise of JOSH AND S.A.M, and how much you will therefore enjoy it.
Renshaw:
>     Every once in a while, I come upon a movie where I simply can't
>get beyond the basic premise; as well as certain individual elements
>might be executed, I'm so turned off by that premise that I can't
>possibly enjoy the film.
     (Note: I want to thank them both for stating the real problem.
Too few reviewers in the general press warn us of the decisions *we*
make that can radically alter our perception of a film.  However, now
I'm going to go into what *I* think the root premises of JOSH AND
S.A.M. are.  I don't want to imply that I'm representing what
*Berardinelli or Renshaw* view as the premises.)
     To some extent, I think there are *at least* two premises involved
in people's perception of JOSH AND S.A.M., but they will both stick in
the craw for some people.
     The *false* premise, as far as I can see, is to view Josh and Sam
as poor-little-abused-kids, or poor-little-disturbed-kids.  To mix
comedy with such kids is unacceptable: "poor-little-abused-or-
disturbed-kids never have a nice day."
     Well, first, that's *false* about kids in trouble in the real
world.  Humor is sometimes what keeps them *alive*.  Presenting *both*
the humorous aspects *and* the abuse can make a film a lot truer than
keeping each in its own tidy little niche.
     Regardless of that, however, it's *false* about the film.  The
screenplay (by Frank Deese) has to walk a very fine line, and does so.
Josh and Sam are neither abused nor disturbed--at least no more so
than lots of the rest of us.
     Yes, the mother seems too self-concerned.  Yes, the boyfriend
seems like a Continental lounge lizard.  Yes, the father is a bit of a
jerk.  Yes, his two stepsons are dumb and smug and worse jerks.  Yes,
Josh and Sam have both coped poorly with the breakup, Josh by
withdrawing into computers and lying and petty larceny, Sam by
withdrawing into himself except to get into fights.
     *None of those are neat things*, and the screenplay does not pass
them off as trivial.  They're real.  For Josh and Sam, they could
develop into *major* problems, and right now the parents are doing
*nothing* constructive.  But those problems are not yet the stuff of
high melodrama--sympathy and concern, yes, but not pegging Josh and
Sam as basket cases or everyone else as creeps.  No matter how lousy
their situations are, many kids go through similar things--*most*
pull out of them before things become a disaster.  Yes, some don't, and
maybe Josh and Sam were turning into two who wouldn't.  But that point
hadn't been reached yet.
     (If either Josh or Sam is a bona fide basket case, we shouldn't
even *think* about what many average kids are--much less the average
USENET reader!)
     But there's another premise, and it's this one I think that gives
JOSH AND S.A.M. an air of unreality.  It's remarkably simple.
     Josh is a liar, right?  He can tell his mother lies about her
boyfriend; she ignores him.  But when he once tells Sam that Sam is a
mutant, the lying game changes.  Sam *believes* him.  Why?  Because it
*fits*.  He's really got a lot of electronics inside?  It explains
*everything*.  Why he feels cold inside, why the other kids think he's
an alien, a robot, why he thinks about being dead.
     You and I can see those as the result of his not being able to
handle the breakup.  But for Sam, that's just how he *feels*.  Now he's
got an *explanation*.  (Do you remember when it seemed entirely
plausible that if you swallowed an orange seed, it would sprout into a
tree in your stomach?  Or lots of comparable ideas?)
     With further lies, the same thing will happen to Josh again:
people will *believe* him.  The film establishes clearly that Josh's
lies--*for the people he tells them to*--will be *plausible*, even
*wanted*.  Worse, when he tries to call a lie back, they won't believe
him; they'll have too much invested in the belief.  Or they'll be out
for revenge at being betrayed.  He will have to follow the lie out to
its end--even if it means apparently killing someone.
     Josh tells a series of lies that leads to that event--after
that, the escape.
     Now, I've said that Josh's lies will be believed.  What if they
would be *real*?  What sort of a story would we have then?  We'd have a
story line that goes back to Midas and underlies any number of horror
stories: What you *say* (want, ask for, etc.) becomes *real*--the
protagonist calls the demon into being and must thereupon destroy it or
be destroyed.  JOSH AND S.A.M. is a non-magical, utterly "realistic"
working out of the same idea.
     *That* strikes me as the root premise of JOSH AND S.A.M..  If
you're willing to accept that premise, JOSH AND S.A.M. can be a romp or
an adventure, but the events of the story do *not* thereafter require
any great suspension of disbelief.
     The premise itself doesn't seem to be that strange.  It's starkly
simple.  It's a traditional staple of literature dealing with the
supernatural.  What's so wrong with giving a perfectly naturalistic
interpretation?  It's been used in comedy.  And haven't we seen small
cases like it in real life?
     Of course, maybe we'd rather not think too closely about what it
would be like if everything we *said* were believed or actually came
true!
     But conceding the premise can do more than simply allow us to
enjoy a romp or and adventure.  It also opens up a further layer of
meaning.  Josh has to deal with the consequences of his words.  And his
habit of casual lying can no longer be casual.  Now, even if *must*
lie, he has to realize that his words have consequences.  It's no
longer a game.
     When Sam buys into the S.A.M. lie so completely, Josh realizes how
cruel he's been--to someone who has never done anything to him.  Josh
has to face the fact that Sam is a nice sweet kid that he's been
jealous of because Sam can do things that he finds next to impossible.
     The movie, then, is to some extent more about Josh than Sam
because Josh created the lies, and must work them out.  Sam's working
out of the lies is his own journey, too, but it's also under Josh's
tutelage.  (I would like to write something strictly from Sam's
perspective, but, let's face it, this review is already *huge*!)
     Seeing JOSH AND S.A.M. as a morality play eases one criticism that
some have made.  The hitch-hiker--Alison--has been seen as a
possible romantic interest for Josh.  But nothing is made of it.  Why
is her character given short shrift?
     Well, first, Josh is *12*!  Alison, is *at least* 20-something,
and has had a *lot* of hard time.  She's far from bonkers, but she's
not totally with us when she shows up, and it's dealing with Josh and
Sam that brings her closer to reality.
     If this were a simple coming-of-age flick, then, yes, she'd be
important for the possible romantic interest, even as "the older
woman".  But if it's *not*, if it's really Josh's dealing with the
demons he's called into being, then her role is radically
different--and probably parallel to Josh's.
     Sorry, going further would take up too much space--and go right
into spoiler territory.
     I had one disappointment: The scene where Josh's lies produce the
mistaken/fake identity.  This was the one place where I think JOSH AND
S.A.M. was trying for stock comedy.
     The comic scene reminded me of "I Love Lucy" shows where Lucy was
digging herself in deeper.  Now, I happen to know that lots and lots of
people think such scenes are funny.  When I watched "Lucy" as a kid,
they drove me up a wall.  I'd cover my ears and scratch my head until
the scene was over.  (Hey--no remote control--no mute!) Very little
got through the noise.  Just enough so I'd know it was safe to listen
again.
     It's embarrassing, but I've been so wrapped up in the story that I
haven't mentioned the actors.  In that regard, I get the impression
that I can safely refer you to practically anybody for an opinion.
People may criticize the film, but the acting seems totally beyond
criticism.  Tierney and Fleiss are simply excellent.
The thing that sort of shocked me was that I felt they were *real
kids*!  Somehow, actors always look like actors to me.  Maybe it's just
a pervasive air of unreality to all movies.  I just don't think I'll
meet the people on the screen when I go outside the theater.
     With Tierney and Fleiss, it was like two kids from outside had
somehow gotten on screen.  The acting doesn't come across as acting:
they just do things, and it happens to be on screen.  I never once got
the idea that one of them was going too far or not far enough; there
weren't any wrong notes.  I wasn't watching either one of them play a
role; I was just seeing them in situations.  How much of that is their
own talent, how much is the result of careful cultivation by the
director (Billy Weber), I don't know.  But it was there.
     It might well be that their unstoppable realism nullified any
hesitations I might have had about the story's reality.
     So, where does all this leave us?  Well, note what I said about
"Lucy."  Some of you like, some dislike "Lucy," some make a cult of it,
some hate it.  It would be fascinating to figure out why.  (I once saw
an article that cheerfully posited "Lucy" and "Gilligan's Island" as
symbolizing the great social/cultural divide of contemporary history.
I think I agree.)
     Regardless of the explanation or lack thereof, our preferences are
a fact.  Some will just not be able to get into the basic premise(s) of
JOSH AND S.A.M..  The question is the one I indicated at the very
beginning: *Can you park virtually every expectation at the door?*
     If you can't, you may very well hit a wall.  But if you *can*, I
think JOSH AND S.A.M. will pay off.  This is one film where our
expectations, our demand for something to fit into preconceived niches,
is the real objection.  JOSH AND S.A.M. doesn't just break a niche or
two, it obliterates them.  It creates it own, and gives you multiple
layers to explore.
a) Ya gotta have someone to talk it over with.  And b) even if the
theater management doesn't object, pizza is a mess to eat in the
dark!
     I wonder whether some of you may be thinking that this is *not*
the thing young minds should be exposed to.  We have a larcenous liar
who's cruel to his brother.  They heist a car, pick up a babe, and make
for the border.  Since you've probably assumed (correctly) that it has
a happy ending, that means that Josh gets off scot-free.  Lie through
your teeth, do credit-card fraud, steal cars, and you, too, can become
a cult-hero for it!
     Well, we don't know he gets off absolutely scot-free.  But it's
the most plausible explanation.
     But when you see it as a morality tale, then it all fits.  The
only way he realizes how down his brother is, is by seeing him buy what
started out as just one of his snotty tricks.  *Then* he sees that
they're cruel, and not just wiseguy stuff.
     Further, the whole journey becomes one of Josh's trying to get Sam
*out* of the lie.  He can't let Sam go on alone.  Nothing else counts.
Moreover, he comes to realize that his lies can't just be withdrawn.
"I'm sorry" doesn't cut it.  He has to face the fact that he put Sam in
the lie, and he has to go in and get him out.  That's his first task.
His own safety comes second.  (Note that the reason he's really in
jeopardy is because he had to protect Sam from getting hit by the
drunk.)  All the other lies are beasts/demons that must be defeated on
their own turf, not just disappeared by admitting he lied.
     None of this is laid on with a trowel.  There's no card at the end
giving the moral of the tale.  The moral (or morals) is (or are) there
nonetheless, sometimes explicitly (as when Josh tells Sam about
forgiveness), sometimes implicitly (as when the lies turn out to mean
more to others than they mean to him).
     Admittedly, a little preaching might be better for younger kids.
But it would be a turn-off for almost everyone else.  But with this
review in hand, you at least have fuel for a little discussion of your
own.
     True, there's always the chance you'll notice your 12-year-old
going over road maps and casting lusting eyes on the family
conveyance.  If so, the only thing I can say is that he was probably
doing so beforehand.  Now, (since presumably you, too, will have seen
the movie) you will at least be alert to the warning signs!
John Walker, walkerj@access.digex.net

Title
Review for Good Son, The (1993)
In Brief: I think your response to THE GOOD SON will depend
     on your response to the question of evil.  I found the
     film excellent--and disturbing.  I was uncomfortable
     throughout.  It focuses on one thing--evil--and
     tries to look at it on its own terms, barring any easy
     ways out.
     Most of our profs would have said that evil is *really* ignorance,
or bad reasoning, or blindness, or unchecked emotionalism, or the
result of a bad environment, a terrible childhood, some traumatic
event, etc., etc., etc.  If you think that, then THE GOOD SON might be
a nice little thriller for you, but maybe a little too low-key, too
bland.  If, further, you think that it's preposterous that a *kid*
could really be *evil*, then the film will be still harder to take.
     But what if evil is a real moral stance, a live threat in human
affairs?  What if it is, or can be, a *decision*?  What if it's
something that can never be completely removed by education or
compassion or prosperity, etc., etc., etc.?  (Which is what some of our
old-line Thomist and Calvinist profs warned us.)  To the extent you
think that--or at least can enter into the mindset--then THE GOOD
SON will be a disturbing analysis of evil.  Even if it shows its origin
in the genre of the thriller, its main action will be a confrontation
with genuine evil in an apparently cheerful, appealing kid.
     Uh, guess which side of the question I'm on?  Guess which profs I
sided with?
     You probably already know the story, but I'll give a quick
sketch.  Mark (Elija Wood) is a kid of around twelve; the movie begins
with the death of his mother.  Because his father has to be out of the
country for two weeks, Mark will spend the time (the winter break) in
Maine, with his Uncle (Wallace--Daniel Hugh Kelly), aunt (Susan--Wendy
Crewson), and two cousins, the younger Connie (Quinn Culkin), and her
brother Henry (Macaulay Culkin), who's Mark's age.
     "Logically," the structure of the story is Mark's growing
awareness of Henry's evil, and Mark's attempt to fight Henry and
protect or warn the others.  Dramatically, the story is of *our*
looking at Henry--becoming aware of his intentions *before* Mark
does.  Henry's actions will start out as apparently just mischievous,
increase in malice, and move to the film's climax.
     Let it be noted that the photography is splendid.  The film starts
in the desert and moves to "Rock Harbor, Maine"--actually a composite
of Cape Ann, Mass., and some Lake Superior.  We see a picture-perfect
New England seacoast winter--the church spires, the town, the sea,
the woods, the works.  And all of that beautifully bright, chilly world
outside is a counterpoint to the darker and essentially colder world
inside Henry.
     But for those of you who want a nice, stereotypical thriller
against that backdrop, well, sorry.  Forget the body count.  Forget the
airborne body parts.  Forget the gallons of blood.  Forget the twisted,
shrieking villain.  You ain't gonna get 'em.
     The film shows its heritage.  There are contrivances; there are
some stretchings of probability; but they strike me as kept to a
minimum.
     Henry is *not* the newest Son of Satan.  He's not a demented
killing machine.  His actions are not superhuman; they're the sort of
things that are relatively within the talents of a bright, adept
twelve-year-old.  But a twelve-year-old who reached a *policy decision*
some time ago: conscience, morality, other people's rights--such
limits *aren't for him*.
     One wonders whether the family library had copies of THE WILL TO
POWER and BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL--although Henry states his point of
view in language both simpler and more attractive than I at least
*remember* Nietzsche using.
     Having just reported what I think is a great verbal summation of a
point of view, I can't ignore the fact that Culkin's performance in
that scene adds another element.  He puts a slightly plaintive,
pleading note into the last words.  His performance opens the door to
an inherent Nietzschean contradiction--that Henry is *lonely*, that
he wants a *friend*, a partner--that he needs someone else, like
himself, who is "free."  (Lacking that, he needs an *adversary*.)
     And throughout, Culkin is able to make Henry "real."  Tolkien and
Lewis, among others, have grappled with the problem of how a *writer*
can make genuine evil be something more than a cardboard devil, all
horns and snarling.  Culkin, as an *actor*, strikes me as having done a
remarkably good job of showing evil that's real.
     Ordinarily, we'd expect to know how someone got this way.  We'd
expect something like a tortured past; that way, we'd have a certain
sympathy for a villain when he showed us elements of the past.  But the
structure of THE GOOD SON leaves aside any "easy" explanation.  (It
doesn't absolutely preclude some such possibility, but it's only the
barest possibility.  See "Comment requiring a spoiler," at the very
end.)
     Culkin is operating within the strictures of a role that precludes
using sympathy as a method of making the evil real.  Instead, now he
gives us a slightly plaintive note, now he shows the petulance of evil,
and usually he projects a clear-eyed self control that shows that this
is a decision he's reached, and he's following through on it.  It's
evil unalloyed by extenuating circumstances, but a nuanced evil--an
emotionally layered evil.
     In some respects, I'm afraid that Wood may have the hardest task
in this film: It's tough having to hold your own on stage against
Mephistopholes!  The structure of the role requires Mark to wise up
only after *we* have been clued in.  It requires him to be suckered
into unwise attacks against the bad guy.  In most such tales, this sort
of role would come off as that of a stooge, a patsy.  (Yes, a "mark.")
     But the age of the protagonists allows THE GOOD SON to transcend
its genre.  Mark is a *kid*!  He behaves in a perfectly reasonable,
mature way *for a kid*.  When Henry is setting him up for a fall, it's
not reasonable to expect a 12-year-old to think, "Hmm, I've read
'Sitting in the Catbird Seat'!  I'd better approach this cautiously!"
     Just as Henry's evil is within the scope of a kid's skills, so
Mark's mistakes are within the scope of a kid's inexperience.
     Wood's strength in this role is directness and
straightforwardness.  Where Henry is "in control," Mark is honest and
open.  Yes, he has a tendency to Wounded Innocence.  And I think the
director (Joseph Ruben) cultivates it too carefully: the turned-around
cap helps frame the face into just a bit *too much* wide-eyed
innocence.  Wood can do the job without photographic underscoring.
     Most of the things I remember about Wood's performance are where
he just lays something on the line.  In fact, two of his most effective
lines are just two words each.
     To Henry's plea not to be afraid to fly, he replies simply,
"You're *sick*."
     And if Culkin gets to state Nietzsche in the best way possible,
Wood gets to pose the traditional question and reply.  He asks the
question of Dr. Davenport, a therapist he's been seeing.
     Where Culkin's performance opened up a view to what it's like to
*be* evil, Wood opens up a view to what it's like to *deal* with evil.
He delivers the lines with a certain nervousness, but ultimately with a
plain facing of facts: courage without bravado.  He gives those last
two words the simple finality they need--as well as a certain rueful
humor.
     I've heard a number criticisms of THE GOOD SON.  I'd like to
consider the ones that I think carry weight.
     1. That the adults were jerks: Culkin talks to them in a way that
they should have recognized as obvious lying.
     2. That Mark learns of Henry's evil too quickly.  It would have
been better if there had been more time, more development so that Mark
would have been closer to being sucked in.
     There have been other criticisms, of course, chief among them that
THE GOOD SON is just not very thrilling.  I'll note that in the
continuity-checking, technicality-hunting atmosphere of the Net, *no
one* has mentioned a couple of glitches that should certainly have
leapt out at them--*unless* the story itself was holding their
attention!  (I only noticed them on a return trip.)
     But perhaps Net people just haven't see it yet; so, back to the
three criticisms.
     1. Is Culkin obviously lying?  I noticed something like this,
too.  Which seems odd--because for Culkin of all people it would have
been almost effortless to turn on the innocence, the puzzlement.  He
could have said "Gee, Mark's behaving funny," and sound *really*
worried.  Instead, he's cool and collected.  Part of this may be the
thriller genre: don't confuse the audience by making the villain *too*
effective.
     But interestingly, we hardly ever see Henry interacting *as a kid*
with adults.  The closest is at the very end.  (Yes, there's also a
talk between Henry and Dr. Davenport, but we see only a fragment of
it.)
     In what we *see*, the adults are wrapped up in some problem, so
Henry doesn't really need to put on his kid show.  More importantly,
*Mark* is almost always on the scene.  And in that case, Henry's
remarks are really addressed to *Mark*, not the adults.
     Intellectually, I would have preferred a few flashes of Henry
putting on "utter innocence," but I think it was a judgement shot
whether to allow that.
     (Noticing that Henry in some sense really speaks only to Mark most
of the time, I also noticed that there aren't any walk-ons in THE GOOD
SON.  There are extras for a few scenes, and crowd voices, but none of
the usual gas-station attendants or store clerks who have speaking
roles.  No neighbors, and *no other kids*.  No one speaks except the
family and Dr. Davenport.  This is a strictly bounded universe.)
     2. More development?  Intellectually, this, too, would have been
something attractive.  But as I thought about it, it raised a lot of
major problems.  How would Henry tempt Mark if adults were around all
the time?  Even if it were an enormously subtle, drawn-out process,
Mark would always be able to go them to express his concerns.  For such
a scenario, you need either *adult* protagonists or kids isolated from
parents or similar figures.  This would be a whole 'nuther picture, not
just an improved, deepened version.
     Keeping kids as protagonists, as the lone actors, my suspicion is
that a film would have to be really towering in order to succeed.
You'd be in the realm of almost pure myth.  I can't really complain
when people shy away from a heroic challenge.  Even if it were
genuinely great, I doubt that modern audiences could swallow it.  I
suspect that for many viewers accepting the reality of evil is a case
of the willing suspension of disbelief.  Doing the whole nine yards
with kids would be too much.
     3. Is it immoral?  Well, first off, it *is* rated R.  And the
"violence and language" rationale is ridiculous.  The violence is
trivial compared to many other flicks; and the *one* four-letter word,
while effective, could easily have been cut.  It's almost as if it was
thrown in to guarantee the R rating because the producers (Ruben, and
Mary Anne Page) had decided that the film *deserved* it.  And it
does--not for the usual reasons, but simply because the theme of evil
*is* mature.  This is a picture *about* kids, not *for* them!
     But the morality discussion comes down to a debate that nobody but
those old-line Calvinists and Thomists really take seriously.  *Should
we do theater at all?*  (Calvinists, no; Thomists, yes, but they
recognize it as a real question.)  Because if we do theater, then we
can't avoid portraying evil.  And to be effective, the portrayal must
render evil attractive to some extent.
     Ruben was reported as saying that he would not have done this film
unless he could get Culkin.  And I think he was probably right.  Yes,
lots of folks on the Net gag at the very thought of Saint Kevin of
Winnetka.  But he is one of the few actors who is appealing enough to
most audience members that they would have to recognize (on some level)
that evil, too, can be attractive.  That *we* might find Henry's choice
to be a possibility for *us*.
     In a thriller, there's always the danger that such questions will
be engaged for mere amusement.  In the present day, it's most likely
that people won't be able to take evil seriously.  Pondering the idea
of evil, I could go even further and wonder whether, for the producers
and the screenwriter (Ian McEwan), the story was merely an empty
intellectual exercise and profit opportunity.  (Also, for Culkin, a
tactically necessary attempt to break out of typecasting.)
     Even conceding the worst, however, the work they created stands on
its own.
     Within a moral framework, it is a task of theater to deal with
evil in such a way that we, the audience, can see that it *is* a
temptation *and* that it's still *evil*.
     Yes, many in the audience will miss the point because, at some
level, they can't recognize the existence of evil.  They'll hunt for
something that fits within the tidier boundaries of psychoanalysis,
say.
     But for those who are willing to look at it, the film must let
them see the attractiveness of evil and still be disturbed by it.
End of basic review--short spoiler follows.
     It was interesting to me that some people have tried to find
reasons why Henry might have been *driven* into evil, rather than just
having *chosen* it.  The big question, of course, is whether he killed
his little brother.  Some have suggested that the trauma of the
brother's *accidental* death was enough to push Henry over the edge.
(But the effect could be the same even if Henry had killed him on an
impulse.  Overwhelmed by the act, the home-made Nietzscheanism would
have been an after-the-fact rationalization.)
     As regards the facts, Henry does not explicitly admit killing his
brother.  But why else would he be concerned that he would be "put
away"?  Leaving open a slight possibility of "trauma," all the evidence
on screen still points to Henry's having killed his brother, and having
*chosen* to do so.
     As regards the motivation, when I hear people offering reasons, I
don't think they've really confronted Mark's question:

Title
Review for Little Buddha (1993)
My form of "rating": I don't believe in reincarnation.  I regard the
     philosophical foundations of Buddhism to be a fascinating
     impossibility: the embrace of absolute self-contradiction.  But
     sitting in the theater watching LITTLE BUDDHA, I could easily see
     myself saying, "Well -- maybe...."
     That, I think, is a pretty high rating -- even if it's a really a
     measure of how loosely held my own beliefs are, or how susceptible
     I am to the world around me (in this case, the film).  Even if
     it's merely a measure of my ability to get into a flick, then
     LITTLE BUDDHA got me to look at the fantasy/reality interface.
     It's one thing to get into, to appreciate, someone's world, but
     when that means getting ready to swallow their world-view, that's
     something else.
In brief: On one level, LITTLE BUDDHA is a very simple story -- almost
     a children's story.  On another, it's a fascinating study of how a
     filmmaker like Bernardo Bertolucci can communicate the "givens" of
     another universe.
     Will you like it?  I don't know.  But I don't think the dividing
     line will be what people's *beliefs* are.  (Religion,
     spirituality, class, culture, etc.)  I think one dividing line
     will be how people regard the use of naive, simple materials to
     make important statements; another will be how they regard the
     presentation of ideas of that are ultimately from an alien
     universe.
    The story is simple: Tibetan monks in exile in Bhutan have signs
that they have found the reincarnation of an important lama.  The
possible reincarnation is nine-year-old Jesse Conrad (Alex
Wiesendanger).  They make contact with the boy's parents, Lisa (Bridget
Fonda) and Dean (Chris Isaak)--of no apparent religion.  Led by Lama
Norbu (Ying Ruocheng), they introduce themselves and a bit of Buddhism
to the Conrads.  Although the Conrads don't really believe any of it,
they agree to let Jesse go to Bhutan for further examination.  Dean,
going through personal and professional problems, goes with them as a
time to sort things out.
    Alongside this, we see the story in a book that Lama Norbu gives to
Jesse.  The book is LITTLE BUDDHA and tells the story of Prince
Siddharta (Keanu Reeves).  We see it in fragments alternating with
Jesse's story.  The Prince, born attended by miracles, grows to manhood
sheltered from pain, age, and death.  When he sees them, his compassion
moves him to begin his journey of enlightenment.  He will become the
Buddha, the Awakened, or Enlightened, One.
    The screenplay of LITTLE BUDDHA is by Mark Peploe and Rudy
Wurlitzer--based on a story by director Bertolucci.  Bertolucci has
said that he wrote a story accessible to children because "In the West,
we are all children as far as Buddhism is concerned."
    Well, some of us may know "too much" about Buddhism.  What some of
us get in college is frequently the more philosophically "interesting":
Hinayana Buddhism, the lesser (smaller) vehicle in which only a select
few can ever ride.  Mahayana, the greater (larger) vehicle is one upon
which a society can be founded.  Westerners have frequently been
trapped between the two.  The one fits in with our individualism, with
following our own path--but therefore it can be just another
self-indulgent personal trip.  The other gives us a world, a universe
that is actually alive--but it's almost completely alien.
    One image in the film lasts only a few seconds, says a lot.  The
Dharma Center in Seattle is in an old building that might have been a
church.  Outside, it's a tacky turn-of-the-century or 1920s building
covered badly with aluminum siding.  Only the new porch announces
what's inside.  Inside, craftsmen are building something straight out
of the Himalayas.
    Another statement is the filming itself.  In Seattle, the world has
a blue cast to it, cold, grey, even in the sunlight.  In the Siddharta
story, things seem to have a gold hue.  Only modern-day Bhutan and
Nepal seemed to be what I expected as "normal" light.  (Cinematographer
Vittorio Storaro even used different film stocks for each.)
    Altogether, Bertolucci gives us the story in such a way that we
don't necessarily have to believe anything.  The newspapers have
reported similar suspected reincarnations in the West; this just gives
a story of what one case might have been like.  But the use of the
child's book lets Bertolucci give us the story of the Buddha as a
*given*.
    Again, we don't have to believe it.  But if we accept it as a child
might, it makes everything else hold together.  Our freedom of
interpretation permits LITTLE BUDDHA to be a sophisticated bit of
proselytizing.  By going through the process of acceptance in fantasy,
we may be more receptive in practice.
    It would be interesting to take a poll of audience reactions.  For
some, it would just look like "Buddhist cathedrals" and "Buddhist
bishops".  It would look oddly *familiar*.  Others are already shocked
by most of Roman Catholicism, High-Church Anglicanism, and Eastern
Orthodoxy.  Tibetan Buddhism would be even more alien.  Who would be
the more susceptible?  And what about whether or not they have a grasp
of basic Buddhist philosophy?
    I gather lots of reviews have begun with references to BILL AND
TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.  Bertolucci's casting Keanu Reeves as
Siddharta has raised a lot of eyebrows.  In fact, one complaint--that
Reeves's style can be "wooden"--is actually a requirement here.
    Reeves is called to play an *icon*, and everyone around him (all
Indian actors) similarly behave in a stylized way.  The Siddharta parts
are written that way.
    Take, for instance, when Siddharta first sees *old* men and asks
his sidekick Chana (Santosh Bangera) about them.
    In fact, I found only two wrong notes in Reeves's Siddharta, and
neither were strictly his.  In one, he cuts off his long hair with a
knife--and comes away perfectly coifed!  In another, his expression
is simply unconvincing--but so noticeable that I assume it was
Bertolucci's decision.
    In dealing with the Siddharta story, the stylization, and American
notions of what a beautiful babe should look like, may be sticking
points for some.  But otherwise, everyone's performance should be very
easy to take.  Well, perhaps Wiesendanger may strike some as a bit
*too* cute to take seriously.  But his performance is natural and
believable.  And he's able to give a hint of knowing or suspecting more
than we'd expect from a nine-year-old.  If you wish to believe it,
he'll let you think that maybe he *is* a reincarnation--without
undermining his essential nine-year-old-ness.
    Similarly, Isaak and Fonda are believable as not believing, yet not
closing out these odd visitors from another continent, another planet.
    Much of the weight for that rests on Ruocheng as Lama Norbu, and on
Sogyal Rinpoche as Kempo Tenzin, who makes the first contact here in
the States.  They project both earnestness and innocence, cheerfulness
and concern.  It's easy to think that Jesse's parents would be willing
to give them a chance.
    Is LITTLE BUDDHA a charming, updated fairy tale?  With a little
religious-history thrown in?  Or is it a simple presentation of a
world-view?  An introduction to another belief system?  Or is it subtle
evangelizing?
    Or is it an indication that Western artists and audiences, having
lost their own faith, will wander around trying on the faith of
strangers?  (Get a faith buzz without the work that real belief might
call for.  Or get a mental aspirin for the pain of a world without
meaning--but without turning it into an addiction, the way believers
do.  Both believers and anti-believers can feel superior.)
    Remember that those alternatives are *not* exclusive.  Fairy tales
can communicate important values.  Simple photographs can be
persuasive.  We can do all sort of things from all sorts of motives.
    The meaning and purpose of LITTLE BUDDHA will, I think, depend on
you.  Whatever Bertolucci's intention, he has created something--like
many children's tales--whose meaning depends on its hearers.

Title
Review for Angels in the Outfield (1994)
My form of "rating": I started boring people with my comments/praise
     as soon as I could; I think I bored practically everybody at
     work.  Also, the main theme stuck with me for a couple of hours
     after I left the show.  I probably have to get the soundtrack.
In Brief: As ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD itself says: you've got to
     *believe*:
     If you don't believe, nothing's going to happen.  If you do, one
     miracle comin' up.  You're about to get a dose of sentiment the
     like of which the '50s could only try to imitate, and the like of
     which succeeding decades have seldom even *tried* to imitate.
     ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD is a remake of the 1951 flick of the same
name.  (I don't run numbers, but I'll note that Leonard Maltin gives
the original three stars; Steven Scheuer gives it three and a half.)
     Roger Bowman (Joseph Gordon-Levitt), ten years old or so, is in a
temporary foster-care situation in the home of Maggie Nelson (Brenda
Fricker).  Roger is a fan of the rock-bottom total-losers last-place
Los Angeles Angels; his mother's dead; his apparently 20-something
father just isn't up to handling a kid.  After a rare meeting with his
father, in which he's been told that he's being handed over to the
courts, Roger asks his father:
     For his father, it's offbeat way to say never.  But Roger takes it
more literally.  That's what he prays for that night--not even sure
whether there's a God, he or she, much less whether there are angels.
     Of course, angels show up the next day, led by Al (Christopher
Lloyd).  Of course, only Roger can see them.  Of course, the angels
make the Angels win the game.
     The ill-tempered manager of the Angels, George Knox (Danny Glover)
can see that *something* odd has happened, and he finds out that Roger
can "see angels".  Roger and his younger cohort at Maggie's, J.P.
(Milton Davis, Jr), become sort of mascots--with Knox basically
following Roger's signals.
     The angels have their work cut out for them with a team of flakes
and goof balls--and a formerly great pitcher, Mel Clark (Tony Danza),
who only wants a chance to get back on the mound.  As the team turns
around with angelic boosting, the nearest this film has to a villain is
Ranch Wilder (Jay O. Sanders)--the Angels' announcer ("The *Voice* of
the Angels"), who tries to put down Knox and the team at every
opportunity.
     It's on the tube, but I don't think I've ever seen the original
version of ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD.  (Although maybe I have--because
one line hit me with deja vu all over again.  [And that, I think, will
be my *only* "baseball metaphor" in this review.])  Turner
Entertainment owns it now, and apparently it's *not* on video.  I hope
they bring it out.
     This 1994 ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD doesn't feel like a "remake" so
much as a "re-creation".  Yes, it's set in the '90s.  Yes, it's updated
a bit.  But its values, its outlook, its sentiments, and everything
about it are really from a time when Hollywood more or less actually
believed in the values and outlook of ordinary nobodies.  Even when
Hollywood didn't really believe, it exulted in expressing those views
-- doing so as a sort of noblesse oblige.
     This was, this *is*, a 1940s film.  (Ignore the technicality of
the 1951 date: The '50s didn't begin until noon, January 20, 1953.)
     Almost needless to say, this '94 version came from Walt Disney
Pictures.
     There are some nice touches in the updating, by the way.  One
updating will probably go unnoticed, and even reinforces the
hopefulness-quotient.  Jackie Robinson had only just broken the color
bar--in what?  '48?  '49?  But now the *manager* is black (as is
Roger's sidekick, J.P.).  An utterly trivial point, some might say, but
nice.
     So also, the presence of a team called the Angels provided a nice
opportunity.  (Dare I say a godsend?)  In 1951, the team was the
Pittsburgh Pirates--perhaps chosen because it was the most
*anti*-angelic name available at the time!
     In other respects, there's a slight amount more of contemporary
realism.  In descriptions of the 1951 film, Roger is an orphan.  Now,
there's an absent father who can't cope.
     Someone who knows the '51 version would have to comment on any
other changes.  The important thing is that the *values* seem to have
stayed the same.
     When you see MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET, do you see it as only a sort
of traditional Christmas thing?  Or do you really *like* it?  Do you
figure it says something, however sappy, that needs to be said?  Do you
want *more*?  Do you want it *now*?
     If you *do*, I think ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD will be a
no-compromises triumph for you.  (Have your parents [or grandparents]
grumbled that "they don't make 'em like they used to"?  If they don't
try to see this on the big screen, you're gonna be able to hold it over
their heads forever.  They weren't willing to put their money where
their mouth was.)
     If you're undecided, well, ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD will be a test
case.  Terms like "shameless manipulation" may come to mind.  To which
I which only respond, well, *yes*!  But shameless manipulation that's
*honest* shameless manipulation!  Shameless manipulation that's
*integral* to the whole film!  Shameless manipulation where it would
*betray* the whole spirit and soul of the film if it *weren't* there!
     Let's face it, lots of people approve of the values of the '30s
and '40s so long as those values are safely restricted to the '30s and
'40s.  If those values show up in a '90s film, then that film is felt
to be a *lie*.  Supposedly, *no one* can believe those things any more
-- they *must* be lying!  Even a remake has to be "intellectually"
updated, according to this view.
     And even many folks who are not so puritanically modernistic still
cannot quite bring themselves to go along.  Yes, they feel, it might
even be *better* if we could believe that stuff again--but, sigh,
well, who can?  We can suspend disbelief in events, even angels; but we
can't suspend disbelief in values, attitudes, and outlooks--even for
a remake.
     I'm trying to find something wrong with ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD.
     Gordon-Levitt carries a large chunk of the film.  He plays Roger
as all eagerness and hope at some times, and dealing with a basically
painful, lousy situation at others.  Given the role, he doesn't have to
deliver a gigantic range, but he projects Roger's emotions effectively
throughout.  He gives us a kid who may not understand what's going on,
but he wants it to work.  (He seems familiar.  I can't place where.  I
have to assume it's from some minor role or from one of my occasional
glimpses at the tube.  But it's sort of fun to imagine he might
resemble a kid in some 50- or 60-year-old flick!)
     Glover handles the manager's role easily.  He's able to be the
hard charger who checked his heart at the door, and then learn to ease
up--if only, at first, not to offend the angels!  Fricker just
radiates basic common sense and decency.  Lloyd is suitably wacky as
Al.  Danza is convincing in a dramatic role as the pitcher hanging on
tenacity and willpower, even while his arm is finding the job harder
and harder to do.  Sanders is particularly neat as the creep we're
hoping to see fall on his face.  His performance gave me one of the few
times when I could understand the idea of "the guy you love to hate".
     Davis makes his sweet little J.P. basically believable as well as
likable.  I think some may find the sweet a bit strong, but this is a
'40s remake.  (Let's face it, this film would be great for a suitable
'40s "New Yorker" cartoon--with director William Dear prompting Davis
or Gordon-Levitt: "In *this* take, I want you to *pluck* their
heartstrings rather than *tug* them!")
     Some of the team may be a little hard to take--they're divided
between modern and ethnic baseball-player types and types straight out
of 45-years-ago comedies.  (The types have never really left comedy,
but again I'd like to see the original to see how much is *directly*
from the past.)
     I suppose for at least some of us who *like* the '30s-'40s
sweetness and light, the too-obvious comic figures might be the first
candidate for expendability.  But the original is from the era of the
Bowery Boys and other staples who make its stereotypes look modest by
comparison.  If I have to put up with a few details that I think went
too far, that's a small price to pay for the rest of the film.
     The screenplay is by Dorothy Kingsley, George Wells, and Holly
Goldberg.  I've got to see the original if only to see what they
changed.  The music, by the way, is by Randy Edelman.  It moves nicely
between upbeat "contemporary" for some of the game scenes, and a full
cinematic treatment for maximum effect.
     So, where does that leave us?  Is the '94 version of ANGELS IN
THE OUTFIELD an anachronism?  *Of course!*  Is it wallowing in
sentiment?  *Undoubtedly!*  Is it "unrealistic"?  *Certainly!*
     But let it never be forgotten that those are *not* criticisms.
For some of us, they're not even mere descriptions.  They're virtues.
With a film like this, I like it not in spite of the fact that it is
"false", but *because* of it.  I can admire both CAMILLE CLAUDEL and
ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD: one for telling a painful truth, the other for
defying the same sort of truth.
     I don't expect angels to swoop down and get my work done for me.
God doesn't do dishes or fix flats.  But some mornings, just getting up
can be said to be a miracle, and plausible evidence of divine
intervention.
     It is precisely because ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD is impossible that
it is hopeful; it is because it is false, that it is true.
     End of basic review.  Comments requiring spoilers follow.
     One has to be careful of a religious issue like spoilers, so I
decided not to mention that if you saw the trailers, you got a synopsis
up through the climax.  At least when I saw it, I *knew* what was going
to happen.  (Although maybe that was subliminal memory from a forgotten
viewing)
     A more interesting spoiler concerns the ending itself.  Yes, I
*wanted* Roger's father to come back with a miracle.  But this is a
very fine ending--and perhaps better from the '40s-sentiment point of
view.  My tribute to the film (almost a "rating") is that I didn't
think of either the problem or its resolution until *after* I was out
of the theater.
     The funny thing was, that after I left the ending left me all
upbeat and whatnot, I suddenly turned somber.
     Knox is black, Roger is white.  Aren't most jurisdictions cool on
interracial adoption?  The neat thing, of course, is that J.P.'s being
black finesses at least part of the problem.  Moreover, it's a black
adult adopting a white kid.  It's not the problem of a minority kid's
sense of identity being swamped in a majority family in a majority
culture.  It's the minority guy who's the rescuer, even as the adult
was rescued, in spirit, by the kid.  Two very nice reversals, I think.
     Intriguingly, this is something a popular '40s flick could never
address.  The facts just weren't there.  The worlds were too separate.
Again, Jackie Robinson had only just started playing in the majors.
     Again, I don't think anyone necessarily *thought* about any of
this.  They might even have decided, "Hey, let's have a black manager,"
as an obvious way to update the film.  The bottom line, though, is that
it had to be someone like Glover--who was a good choice for the
role.  Perhaps someone decided to make J.P. black in response, but I
suspect it was all no big deal.
     The '40s were not unaware of the difficult balance between groups
keeping their own identity, and yet working together and recognizing
one another's worth.  This was the heyday of ethnic politics.  And then
and since then, we've always had to deal with the tendencies to
obliterate the differences in forced conformity, or to rule some groups
out of the community, or to split up into warring camps.  Presumably,
there has to be a better way.
     ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD just ignores the problem and focuses on the
simply human.  That resolution *fits*.  It's the sort of thing that
fits in with the whole spirit of the film.  Unnoticed, perhaps even
unconsciously, the people who put together the remake added something
that could only be added nearly 45 years after the original.
     If it's impossible, that's what makes it hopeful.  If it's false,
that's what makes it true.

Title
Review for Far From Home: The Adventures of Yellow Dog (1995)
My form of "rating": I don't think I expected it on leaving the
     theater, but I've found that the characters in this film keep on
     coming back to me.
In brief: In an odd way, FAR FROM HOME is an "atmosphere" film, a film
     of character exposition as distinct from character development.
     If it's the sort of atmosphere you want to get into, try to see it
     on the big screen.
     In some sense, there isn't any story.  "Plot" is not what FAR FROM
HOME is all about.
     To the extent it can be plotted, it's simple: Kid (14 or so) finds
dog (or vice versa, depending on your point of view).  On boat trip,
kid and dog are washed overboard in storm; they land on wilderness
shore in British Columbia.  The family has to cope with the uncertainty
and a search.  Kid and dog have got to try to survive and get out.
     One of the things I dislike about my present situation is that if
I see a film I want to write about, I know it will usually take a week
or two to get the free time to do so.  I suppose I should be glad that
I get anything writ at all, but it's annoying in a case like
this--where the film won't be around much longer, and where people
don't seem to recognize its central value.
     The reviews I've heard have been in the faint-praise department:
FAR FROM HOME is supposedly a nice little flick, one where you can wait
till it comes out on video.  The problem is that people who would like
FAR FROM HOME may lose a lot on the small screen--and maybe never
notice what they're missing.
     "Little" films frequently translate well to the small screen.  In
a circumscribed medium, a circumscribed universe can draw us in.  And
yes, in some sense, this might be called a "little" film.  But "quiet"
is more accurate.  As far as characters go, there's only a handful of
speaking roles.  There are four family members, a walk-on or two, and
only two non-family-members of any significance.
     But the setting of FAR FROM HOME and the challenges faced are as
essential as the precision of its focus.  And the setting is large.
Angus (Jesse Bradford), his parents (Bruce Davison and Mimi Rogers),
and his kid brother, Silas, live in a farmhouse somewhere in the
Pacific Northwest.  The woods come up to open fields around the house.
The scenery is of wildness and countryside.  It's consistently
splendid, by the way.  The wilderness is a co-star of sorts.
     And we all know there is going to be an adventure in the deep
woods.  The trailers, the posters, the promos all announce it.  Words
like "contemplative" or "atmospheric" *don't* leap out at us--maybe
not even after seeing the film.
     But if you're looking for "adventure" in the standard sense, this
ain't it.  You won't get one tidy obstacle followed by another--where
each challenge is a real or potential turning point for the plot, all
leading to a climactic struggle.  Also, you won't get character
development--where the obstacle or struggle forces some change on the
hero or those around him.
     Someone with better writing background than I have will have to
fill in the terms, but there are two different kinds of "action" at
issue here.  One is an action or event that determines a story line:
change such a "pivot point" or "breakpoint", and we'd have a different
story.  The other kind of action is just action: doing what's necessary
to work out the consequences of the pivotal action or event.
     As far as pivot points, there are only really two: kid and dog get
together; kid and dog get washed up on wilderness shore.  Then
everything works forward with how they and everyone else deal with it.
     Before Angus and Yellow Dog find one another, the action is
minutiae: Angus leads his kid brother and a friend of his brother on a
race through the woods trying to catch a rabbit.  After Angus and
Yellow Dog meet, the action is still more action that advances the
action without changing it much.  Yellow Dog messes things up; Yellow
Dog gets Mom to like him.  The boat trip and storm are the most
condensed pivotal actions, and even they are predominantly minutiae:
Angus getting coffee for Dad, Yellow Dog sliding on tilting deck.
Afterwards, almost everything is minutiae--only it's life-or-death
minutiae.
     Hmm...  If "action" means only pivotal action to you, have I made
this sound dull enough?!  Are you thinking maybe the characters must
have been colorful enough to command my involvement?
     Well, if you're thinking of histrionics, forget it.
     If nothing "happens", it should also be noted that no one "does"
anything.  No one grabs control and drives the story down a new path.
No one rebels; even when someone takes an action that may complicate
things, it's because it was the sensible thing to do at the time.
     Moreover, we don't get speeches.  These are not people who explain
themselves.  No soul-searching, no traumatic self-disclosure, no
railing at fate, no "emoting" at all.  Only occasionally (in the woods
scenes) is there a voice over, where we hear what Angus is thinking so
we can understand why he takes a course of action.  And then it's just
the sort of thing he might have said aloud if they were other people
around--the same sort of thing he's also said aloud to Yellow Dog.
     Angus and his family hold the perfectly ordinary conversations
that ordinary people hold.  These are just nice people I would more
likely expect to meet than to see in a movie.  Watching the beginning,
my first question was whether this was based on a real-life story,
where they kept pretty close to a book or something that one of the
participants had written.
     So, we have a movie where nothing happens, where nothing is done,
and nothing is said.  This is a movie?
     In fact, the film is continually active and looks on the surface
reasonably North American.  The scenes change, there's activity going
on all the time.  In the second sense of action--working out what
happens after a breakpoint--FAR FROM HOME is *all* action.  It never
drags; it never wastes time.
     But there's almost something more like some Japanese and Swedish
films.  Everything is communicated by implication, by indirection.
Particularly with Angus, again and again we simply see his face as he
surveys a situation.  No dialogue, no attempt to stretch for dramatic
facial expression; he's just thinking, sizing things up.  Then he will
move.  And almost invariably, we will know why without being "told".
     In fact, writer/director Phillip Borsos seems very deliberately to
want us never to have the usual expostulations.  In one scene with the
parents, when the search seems to be going nowhere, the mother walks to
the bathroom; as she opens the door, we see the father and it's evident
he's been crying.  Both of then abruptly change.  It's as if the door
has been slammed shut again.  They both know what's going on, they
don't deny it.  They hold each other for a moment, and talk about what
to do.  But any emoting takes place off screen; we are not meant to see
it or hear it.
     In fact, I'd like to have the time to look at the role of the most
silent character of all--Yellow Dog.  He is, in some sense, the most
pivotal character of all, next to nature, the wilderness.  But this
review will be late enough (and long enough!), as it is.  Suffice it to
say, his presence in the plot should underscore any ideas about the
quietness of the speaking roles.
     Thinking particularly of the repeated camera shots of Angus sizing
things up, I'm reminded that a number of foreign directors have been
fascinated with the traditional American western.  At first, joining
the two stereotypes seems unlikely--the western, presumably all
action and shoot-em-up; the foreign "art" film, all atmosphere and
implication.
     But the hero, the "strong, silent type", is an intersection of the
two.  Sizing things up is something he does all the time.  Apparently
he's impassive, unemotional, but *we* the audience write in the
emotions, the color and tone taking place behind the face.  *We*
measure the possible costs of his decision; *we* ponder what
implications something will have for the future.
     We base our judgements on shared myths and expectations about the
hero and his role; but we also bring our personal twist to it.  In some
sense, the relatively expressionless face contains *all* the emotions;
*we* choose which one(s) to select out for this scene or that event.
The viewer of an action film can be doing as much interpretation as the
viewer of any apparently obscure art film.  In the western, the
interpretation may be more instinctive and less conscious, but it's
interpretation nonetheless.  The two types of film differ in the kind
of action on screen; they're similar in the kind of viewer involvement.
     So it is with Angus and FAR FROM HOME.  Take the rabbit chase in
the first few minutes of the film.  Note: Hunting a rabbit on the
*run*?!  With a slingshot?!  In second growth?!  That's not a game one
is apt to win.  What does it say about someone willing to play it?  And
to take his kid brother and friend along as a learning experience?
     Here, though, the rabbit finally freezes; Angus has a free shot.
Thoughtful, he aims at the rabbit.  Nothing is said, but *we* know why
he acts the way he does.  Further, we know what he doesn't--that the
context of his decisions about such things is going to change
radically.  That's what the ads and the previews and the posters have
told us.  That's why we're here; that's what we're here to see.
     Angus in some sense, has done nothing, taken no decisions that
affect the plot.  *We* have done a lot, all in the space of a few
minutes.  We've gotten to know a fair amount about this kid; we've
gotten the opportunity to put his present state in the context of what
we know lies ahead for him.  And the most important points on screen
have been wordless and expressionless.  If we've gone down any blind
paths in our interpretation, we can blame only ourselves, not the
characters.
     Practically everything in FAR FROM HOME will be like that.
     The question, then, is do we want to spend the time inside the
world of Angus and his family?
     I'm afraid we now live in a world where the popular image is that
an unexpressed emotion is a lie.  You're not truly sad or cheerful or
whatnot unless you ram it down the throat of everyone within attacking
distance.  Everything must be explained to people; they in turn, must
reflect it all back or suffer having it explained and analyzed still
further.
     In some respects, they remind me of the way I've described my
family and town: Where I come from, the men don't wear jewelry; then
again, where I come from, the women don't wear jewelry, either.
     I don't think the parents ever verbally state anything about their
love for each other or the two kids; but everything they do, and how
they do it, does.  They sound "modern" and middle-class in their ways
of discussing whether Angus can keep Yellow Dog, but they evoke images
going back to farm families and poor people in small towns.  In fact, I
had one small problem in dealing with Davison and Rogers.  All the
images I have of such parents involve either older people, or people
apparently somewhat poor.  (Instinctively, I guess I expect Aunty Em!)
     Angus's father and mother just seemed a tad young and
sophisticated.  (Am I the only one who always felt his parents to be so
old?!)
     The kid brother, Silas, however, gave me no such problem.  He
walks just this side of the line between seven-year-old and continual
irritation.  (To the extent there's a difference!)  He may run around
in a rain coat/cape playing super hero, but he knows when to cool it.
     The important thing, though, is that many 14-year-olds would find
any seven-year-old a major pain; he'd be their cross to bear.  Well,
Silas's not a pain, and Angus just lets him trot along.  Silas doesn't
tell us so much about himself as about *Angus*.
     And Bradford brings off his role as Angus effortlessly.  I am no
expert on acting; and as I've said, the style of film demands that we
the audience write much into the action.  Having said that, I have to
say that Bradford makes it easy to write an enormous range of emotions
into Angus.  Bradford projects Angus as sensible and good-humored
before the woods, as level-headed and resourceful once in the crunch.
He gives us a tenacity that is not a matter of big emotional drive so
much as that giving up or breaking down is simply not part of his
character.
     I should also note that Bradford does well on the subtler
shadings.  (True, it's a film that is *all* subtle shadings.)  The
particular subtler shading I'm thinking of forces me to warn you that
yes, the filmmakers have condescended to the demand for lust and the
gratuitous sex scene!
     FAR FROM HOME has its own *vamp*!  Sultry!  Sophisticated!
Seductive!  Exerting all her feminine wiles to snare the innocent hero
for her own!
     As a charming aside to the main action, there's a girl from school
who has a crush on Angus.  The same age apparently, she also points up
the fact that Angus may be far beyond his peers in resourcefulness and
other virtues, but he still has some learning to do in other
departments!  FAR FROM HOME is *not* a "coming-of-age" flick!  Her two
brief scenes add an element of very quiet humor, and a reminder that
the great wide world is waiting outside the boundaries of the woods.
     As one of the only two significant non-family figures, she also
acts as a counterpoint to the head of the search effort.  On the
surface, he seems almost cold--concerned about wind and fuel while
Angus's parents are concerned about Angus.
     But it's as if Borsos wanted to give a small message: even the
apparently unsympathetic character is on our side.  He's just normally
businesslike and cool.  Underneath, there is no question about his
concern or commitment.  In one scene, the words are important, as he
reassures Angus's mother that he would never give up the search.  But,
as in a western, the words are brief and to the point.  When a
character like this does explain himself, he does so in terms of what
he will *do*.  That's enough.
     And is that economy of speech merely cinematic?  In my own
experience, it's something like what we'd see in real life.  We
interact with people in the course of work, chores, idle conversation
and whatnot.  We *infer* what's going on inside.  This is still a
dominant mode of conversation for many people.  Depending on the
context, a raised eyebrow can be the same as a guffaw or the same as a
rebuke.
     Perhaps it is better for feelings to be discussed
explicitly--particularly when dealing with people from disparate
     backgrounds, or psychologically traumatic events.  But people from
the same family or background can do pretty well with things being
implicit.  Sentences don't have to be completed, points don't have to
be spelled out.  They're known.
     Such a "language" can be used as a form of deceit, of denying
unpleasant truths.  But so can false openness.  For Angus's family, the
reliance on implicits and ordinary conversation is a language of love
and truthfulness.
     They communicate through action as much as--or even more
than--words.  At a point where the stereotypical western and the
stereotypical art film overlap, their communication, their speech, is
silent.
     So, does that family, that kid, and that world sound like
something you would want to be part of?  Something that you'd want to
be acquainted with?
     If it does, then you have to be part of it in the same way you're
part of similar worlds in real-life.  Most people don't verbally assign
labels to themselves as to their personalities and attitudes.  We see
it in how they do things.  (And even with those who do label
themselves, we have to check the label against the actions.)  We have
to *look* at each other--and *carefully*.
     For longer than I wish to think about, I've been living in
Washington, D.C.  And as Leadbelly sang years ago, it's a boozhwah
town.  I think I *like* the intelligentsia and others in the upper
middle classes, but frankly, I don't share their experience.  I
understand them in the sense of being able to predict their behavior,
and I pay the rent by analyzing and reporting and writing on things of
interest to them.  I am arguably *more* one of them than many!  Still,
they've never seemed very sane to me.  Terms like "frivolous" and
"self-absorbed" come to mind.
     Unfortunately for me, their views are apparently more typical of
"serious" filmgoers than mine are.  I can see something that speaks to
me in lots of films, but very few that seem really to describe my
family and the people I grew up with.
     FAR FROM HOME is one such film.  These people in the Pacific
Northwest don't seem as scruffy as the folks I recall from home.  And
they're really nice folks, which isn't true for everyone.  But I don't
consider that a weakness of the film.  Decent, sane people are worth a
film now and then, aren't they!?
     Add to that, FAR FROM HOME puts a kid I might have known in a real
adventure.  Angus is a kid I would have *admired*.  But *been*?  Sorry.
Therefore, I don't want to just "see" a film like this.  I want to *get
into* it.
     If you think you agree, then try to see FAR FROM HOME on the big
screen.  If you have to see it on video, then do so deliberately.
Disconnect the phone, commit yourself to sit there, just as you would
in a theater.  Block out the world, the endlessly psychoanalyzing
commentaries, the exchange of monologues where people appear to
interact but never reach touch one another.
     FAR FROM HOME is *not* far from home, even though some of us may
be.  And like life, it's a life-or-death adventure.

Title
Review for Basketball Diaries, The (1995)
My form of "rating": One test is how many times a film comes up in my mind
     afterward.  THE BASKETBALL DIARIES came up *lots* of times.  Arguably
     too many for comfort.
In brief: If you can take a film that tells a story and tells it well, I
     think you'll take BASKETBALL DIARIES.  I don't know whether you'll
     "like" it, but it will be worth the trip.
     But if you want explanations, if you want to know *why* somebody does
     something, BASKETBALL DIARIES will be much more problematical.
     Moreover, if you're tempted to lay explanations on facts that don't
     provide them, BASKETBALL DIARIES may provide you with too many
     temptations.  (See the "Comments requiring spoilers," at the end.)
     The story is simple: Here's a kid in parochial high school--Jim
Carroll (Leonardo DiCaprio) he's bright, non-stop wise-ass, not too
concerned about whether his recreational activities may be against the law.
He writes a diary all the time, he plays basketball, he drinks.  His best
friends don't write, but they do the rest.  The drinking will be augmented
by inhaling, the inhaling by injection, and all three by various other
forms of ingestion scattered here and there.
     Scratch school.  To pay the bills, the recreational activities will
turn to serious theft and body rental.
     Check out your high-school yearbooks.  You should be able to find at
least a couple of kids who took the same trips as Jim Carroll.  It's just
they didn't write, or else they didn't save their scribbled notes to write
a book like THE BASKETBALL DIARIES.
     Watching BASKETBALL DIARIES, I had the feeling of watching guys I'd
known--not well, not friends necessarily.  I might not have even trusted
them very much, but they were part of my world nonetheless.  What happened
to them?
     Maybe that's why the earlier part of BASKETBALL DIARIES had a
stronger, very unpleasant affect on me.  Jim is still in school, things are
still apparently all right.  His mother (Lorraine Bracco) nags a little,
but that's a mother's job.  Then she mentions he'll need a summer job --
for the "responsibility".  If he can't find anything else, he'll have to
work at the hotel where she works.
     Somehow that was acutely depressing.  Life is a long, dingy,
high-school corridor--leading absolutely nowhere except a nowhere job.
Charming.  Have another beer.
     When I was Jim's age, I kept my eyes resolutely averted from the end
of the corridor.  Besides, I knew, if no one else did, that the Navy would
come to the rescue.  Nonetheless, thinking about the future was not
advisable.  But without a faith that you could escape, and being too
cocksure to imagine taking one of those nowhere jobs, what then?
     When Jim finally goes too far, somehow BASKETBALL DIARIES became more
reassuring to me.  OK, he's a junkie.  He gets out of it, or he doesn't.
He lives, or he dies.  In a weird way, he's already escaped.  Besides,
being a junkie or a drunk is something other people do.  They're my
friends, but they're not me.
     But being in high school with nowhere to go--*that* is reality.
That's the razor's edge where *maybe* I could have gone the way Jim Carroll
and his friends went.
     One thing may be off-putting or just incomprehensible for some people.
     The settings are all right now--new cars, contemporary signs.
     But Jim and his mother live in a slum building.  Poor Irish in lower
Manhattan today?  The kid going to parochial school?  Even if it's true, it
doesn't fit our stereotypes.  Also, there is nothing of a recreational drug
scene.  He goes from beer to sniffing cleaning fluid to junk.  Well, it's
not that simple, but we see no clubs, no glamour scene.
     I wondered whether it had really been in the 50s.  Actually, it was
the 60s.  (I took a look at the book after finishing most of this review.)
The glamour scene isn't happening yet; to some lights, Jim was a shade
ahead of his time.  And if $40 sounds trifling, remember that this was when
starting wage was a dollar an hour.
     Some reviewers have disliked this ambiguity, the implicit
anachronisms.
     The reason for the ambiguity is apparently a mixture of economics and
a sort of truthfulness.  The film was reportedly done for less than $4
million.  To recreate the mid-60s in New York locations would, I take for
granted, have added megabucks to the total.  To change the story to make
it fit the 90s scene could have produced a perfectly good film, but it
would have had to be a different world from the one in Jim Carroll's book.
     Strangely, though, I sort of liked not being sure when it was.
There's an odd disjunction that fits well with going over the edge.  How
much of time and place do you retain when you're wrecked all the time?  A
90s world, bargain-basement, devoid of much of the visible drug scene is an
oddly science-fiction universe that seems to match its subject.
     If the folks who made BASKETBALL DIARIES did not waste money on
backdrops, they did not scrimp on acting talent.  Leonardo DiCaprio is
simply great, and the rest of the cast is admirable.
     DiCaprio makes makes Jim both appealing and real.  He goes from kid
racing along the edge, defiant, cocksure, all energy, to junkie trying hard
not to crash too hard, not really in the same world as the rest of us,
running on a very frayed tether.
     In playing Jim's best friend Mickey, Mark Wahlberg (yes, Marky Mark)
gives us a very nice street tough, not much morals, not much thought, but
goofy and a lot of fun if he's on your side.
     Patrick McGaw as Neutron looks more "conventionally" intelligent; he
seems to have his eye on the main chance; he seems more clinical and
detached and more under control than either Jim or Mickey could ever be.
     Those three are basketball players, jocks, good looking, aggressive.
Push comes to shove, James Madio as Pedro is probably a lot more like what
most of us would be if we had to survive on the streets: quieter, weaker,
making sure to stay in the company of the big guys.
     Potentially, all four guys could be stock characters.  But there's a
reason why characters become stock: We know people like them.  Unless you
went to a *very* selective high school, all four will be familiar.  In some
respects, I would want to be around them.  They're fun.  In other respects,
no way.  Jim has a screw slightly loose; Mickey kicks people when they're
down; Pedro is a sneak.  They all take larceny for granted.  I probably
couldn't bring myself to dislike them--unless I or someone close to me
got in their way.  But *trust* them?  Fat chance.
     As Jim's mother, Lorraine Bracco arguably has the toughest role.
She's not on screen very much.  She's just there, sort of.  After a while,
she's knows something's badly wrong, but knows she doesn't how to deal with
it.
     Ernie Hudson as Reggie, a black friend of Jim's who plays basketball
with him, is just good sense and good humor--but he can see what's going
on because he used to do drugs, himself.
     Bruno Kirby as Jim's coach, Swifty, is faintly but instantly
dislikable.  He's vague, sort of, continually hinting of meaning well but
being, let's say, unreliable.
     Altogether, a weird sense of reality in a drug-soaked film.  And even
Jim Carroll himself appears in an surreal cameo.
     Well, what are we to make of this?  I'm told BASKETBALL DIARIES is
good as an anti-drug film.  Well, it certainly gives us a good picture of
what one guy and his friends will do for their next fix.  But will that
persuade some kid who's dragged to it to see what happens to druggies?  I
can hear the reply: "I mean, hey, it's not for everybody.  Most people
can't handle it.  But me, I got it under control."
     I've also heard that the male prostitution thing is far from as clear
as it might be.  Jim is thoroughly heterosexual, what's the *effect* on him
beyond initial disgust?
     But I think all these things are beside the point.  To dwell on the
presumed effect, or to dwell on one particular aspect of the story is to
miss that it's a story about one kid and what happened to him.  The point
is not whether others will learn from it.
     The point is not about an aspect or a "problem" to be examined.  It's
about a *person*, a particular individual.
     The point is not that we should understand him or his problem.  The
point is that we should get to know him a bit.
     And there, of course, we can say that the book has been considerably
tidied up into a more straightforward story.  It's also been sanitized
somewhat.  Jim's not quite the amoral creep he can be in the book.  He was
also younger in real life; the book takes three years, and closes with him
at 16 in 1966.
     But how much of the book is true?  Reading it, my instinctive
suspicions arise.  The drugs are true; the larceny is true; the great sex
is highly suspect.  We've got a 13-to-16-year-old writing this stuff, after
all; teenagers are apt to embellish certain things, shall we say.
     Yet we are all big boys and girls now, and we might as well recognize
that it could all be true.  (Or none, for that matter.)  In any event,
we've got a character here.  A person.  Even if purely fictional, he still
*could* be someone we knew, someone we know.
     I will cheerfully admit I have a great deal of ambiguity about a
character like Jim Carroll, and about his friends.  I don't think
BASKETBALL DIARIES taught me anything about any of them, not about their
defects or strengths, not about what they've gone through.  I obtained no
new "data" from BASKETBALL DIARIES.  But the film brought him and them
alive again in my life.  I got to know them a bit better, or to renew the
acquaintance anyway.
     In brief, Jim gets clean, and the film closes with him giving a
reading/performance at a club of some sort--continuing the text from THE
BASKETBALL DIARIES that he's been saying from time to time over the film.
     Does that give some profound meaning to BASKETBALL DIARIES that it
wouldn't have had otherwise?  As I noted in "In brief": Are you tempted to
lay on explanations when the facts don't provide one?
     Well, reviewers aren't just tempted, they're driven.  And so I read a
number of folks who saw BASKETBALL DIARIES as a case of the old
Art-and-drugs thing.  Presumably, a) Jim Carroll's Art immunized him from
the worst effects of drugs; or b) the drugs added something to his Art.
     Without his Art, the drugs would have destroyed him.  Without his
drugs, his Art would not have been so great.  Choose one.  Say it
Meaningfully.
     Yes, this is a cute, 19th-century debate that has mesmerized whole
generations of artists, poets, drunks, and druggies.  Yes, some major
figures in the arts have been screwed up in particular ways that make one
position plausible or the other.
     The minimum that need be said is that it doesn't have much to do with
BASKETBALL DIARIES.  If you already take a position on the Art/Drugs issue,
you can see Jim's story as supporting you.  And there may be something to
the idea that *something* in an addict's personality--some passion or
drive--may provide the hidden resource than helps getting off the
chemical of choice.  But BASKETBALL DIARIES doesn't tell us that Jim's Art
led through the dark night and out into the light.  It certainly doesn't
give us any reason to think that his writing was somehow elevated because
of drugs.  (Although he is clearly the type that would write about
*anything* that presented itself, and life-and-death experiences make good
topics for writing about.)
     Perhaps Carroll has written something somewhere that gives rise to the
Art-and-drugs stuff.  But it doesn't show up in BASKETBALL DIARIES.
     Arguably, Jim Carroll's story would have been much the same if his
great passion had been rock or auto mechanics or computers or running or --
more to the point--basketball.
     These are, after all, THE *BASKETBALL* DIARIES.

Title
Review for Highlander III: The Sorcerer (1994)
In brief: If you don't go in with any great expectations, I think
     you'll find that HIGHLANDER 3 is a perfectly adequate
     action-adventure flick.  It doesn't dawdle, and it has some really
     neat settings, a suitably slimy villain, and a fair number of
     satisfying adventure ideas.
Unfortunately, it seems to be lacking whatever "something" it would
     take to get me running back for a second viewing.  A cult film, I
     don't think it will be.  But because I found it pleasant, it
     *does* give me occasion to think about what's missing.
     We have here an immortal hero, Connor MacLeod (Christopher
Lambert).  He's sitting at the feet of an immortal wizard, Nokono
(Mako) in the wizard's cave in 16th-century Japan.  Out in the snow is
riding an immortal villain, Kane (Mario Van Peebles), with two immortal
henchmen, to off the wizard and the hero.  Specifically, he intends to
decapitate them.  If he does so, he gets the power of his victim.  In
this flick, that's just part of the immortals business.  And
decapitation, by the bye, seems to be the only way to kill these
immortals--although except for a really impressive regenerative
ability, they're not much stronger or brighter than average.
     The really big thing about these immortals, however, is that
"There can only be one".  There can be a number of players on the field
for a long time, but ultimately the immortals game is *not* a win-win
situation.  MacLeod may be unwilling to off Nokono to improve his
position, but Kane is, after all, a villain, and under no such
restraint.
     In the ensuing contretemps, the cave falls in on the villain and
henchmen, but the hero escapes.
     Now it's the present, and an Important and Controversial
Archaeologist, Alex Johnson (Deborah Unger) is called to the
construction site for a big high-tech project in Japan.  Guess where it
is!  They know it's some sort of archaeological site, and she's there
because the local archaeologists have brought her in as their big gun
against the business types who just want to get their plant built.
Needless to say, her thing is to use legends and stuff as clues to
archaeology.  She only needs to touch down for a minute before she
thinks of Nokono and his cave.
     While the decision makers are fretting over the contest between
antiquities and economics, things are rumbling downstairs.
     Kane _et al._ emerge.  Being cooped up for 400 years has not made
them any nicer or fonder of MacLeod, and they set out to complete
unfinished business.
     On the other side of the world, MacLeod set up digs a few years
ago near Marrakech, Morocco.  He has a nice life and an adopted son,
John (Gabriel Kakon).  By means we needn't discuss here, MacLeod
realizes that the game is afoot, and decamps for New York City (site of
HIGHLANDER 2 ten years before, by the way).  In New York, the trio will
meet.  And, oh, did I note that Alex is a dead ringer for Sarah, a
former love of MacLeod's from the 1700s?  Well, she is.
     So, do you have it all set up?  It's simple arithmetic, really.
Number of immortals in movie equals "n".  Number of immortals at end of
movie who have heads still affixed cannot exceed n - (n - 1).  Or from
the other perspective, decapitations cannot be less than n - 1.  Is
that a formula for an action-adventure, or what?
     First, let it be noted that I never saw HIGHLANDER 1 or 2.
HIGHLANDER 1 seems to have been rather well liked, HIGHLANDER 2
frequently denounced as a dog having nothing to do with HIGHLANDER 1.
In HIGHLANDER 3, I get the feeling that the filmmakers have tried to
put in some stuff to make the two previous flicks all part of the same
story/universe.  But for me, I have to take HIGHLANDER 3 on its own.
     And we might as well start with acting, since my main question
that might be answered by the the other two films could also be an
acting problem.  In the opening scenes, MacLeod seems almost a bit
childlike.  Either that, or a bit of a wimp.  In the later scenes,
neither trait shows up.  Acting?  Or a reference to previous history?
I don't know.
     For those of you who have never seen Christopher Lambert, by the
way, he speaks with an unplaceable European accent.  For fantasy's
sake, someone might say that it's how a native Gaelic speaker from the
1500s might speak English.  But in a brief flashback to those days, his
burr didn't sound too unusual.  I assume Lambert is following in the
Schwartzenegger and Van Damme tradition.  (We may even come to *expect*
adventure heroes to speak with foreign accents!)
     Van Peebles, of course, has no problems with accents.  And
depending on your taste, he may be reason alone to see or avoid
HIGHLANDER 3.  His Kane is more slimy than sinister, more creepy than
cold, not a genuinely serious tyrant or monster.  Van Peebles plays him
with an inner core of silliness.  It's almost like he wants to stop and
demand that the audience boo and hiss when he comes on stage.  Then he
can preen himself on our hostility.
     For her part, Unger carries off the Alex/Sarah role nicely.  She's
attractive, assertive, and the stuff modern audiences presumably
expect.  But she's not really a player in the action.  Those roles are
for immortals.  Even the police detective, Lt. Stenn (Martin Neufeld),
who is trying to pin unlawful-decapitation raps on MacLeod going back
to HIGHLANDER 2, is really a cipher, having little impact on the action
of the film.
     Al right, having said that the detective has little affect on the
action, we can move to the main virtue of HIGHLANDER 3 as an adventure:
it *moves*.  I wasn't bored; I wasn't wondering when they were going to
get something done so that we could get back to the real stuff.  There
are flashbacks to MacLeod's affair with Alex's double in the 1700s;
there are scenes where MacLeod and Alex size one another up; but they
didn't bother me.  (Although they may have contributed to a lack of
focus.)
     For those of you turned off by mindless gore, by the way, I
thought the decapitations were very well handled.  Can I say, extremely
tasteful beheadings?  Depicting the events straightforwardly, but not
intended to get folks to upchuck.
     Similarly, the special effects were worked in nicely.  It didn't
look like just a lot of money spent to impress the rubes.  For
instance, when an immortal kills another, he is surrounded by sort of
swirling light currents, the dead body levitates, etc.  Like the
decapitations, nicely done, not vulgar or ostentatious.
     True, there were improbabilities piled on improbabilities--not
the least of which being *everything* about Alex.  But they were
*useful* improbabilities--they moved the action along.
     Nonetheless, while I'm willing to give a action flick its
improbabilities, I figure it's sloppy on the filmmakers' part if they
overdo it.  And HIGHLANDER 3 strikes me as having overdone it.  There
were at least a couple of major points where I was thinking to a
character that "This is a demonstrably uncool move on *your* part,
neighbor."
     But, like I say, I can be forgiving on mere irrationality--so
long as the film gives me something in return.  And HIGHLANDER 3 shows
glimmers of having something in stock, but someone is too lazy or
unimaginative to bring it all out.
     I don't know who exactly to blame, but the screenplay was by Paul
Ohl, the story by William Panzer and Brad Mirman.  In all this, also,
you can try to decide to what extent director Andy Morahan should take
credit or blame.
     Now, if you're looking for reasons why HIGHLANDER 3 is less
successful than it might be, some of you might think of those tasteful
decapitations.  I mean, isn't "action-adventure" supposed to be a
euphemism for gore-flick?
     Well, the critics frequently act as if "action equals gore", and
action flicks *do* seem to have a cavalier attitude towards
dismemberment, disembowelment, and other means of egress from this vale
of tears.  But I don't think that action films or action fans *demand*
it.  What I think is necessary is propulsion, movement--in other
words, action films need *action*.  (Gee, how surprising!)  Spectacular
killings are a lazy way of achieving or imitating action.
     HIGHLANDER 3 has movement, yes, but it didn't strike me as *going*
anywhere.  We know we need a big fight between Kane and MacLeod, but
the stuff on the way seems only stuff on the way.  There's little build
of events that tie things together with the climax crowning it all.
One doesn't *lead* to another in HIGHLANDER 3; instead, one thing
merely *follows* another.  It's just a sort of sparring.
     Now, I can't really figure out to demonstrate this weakness.  I
mean, the story does move nicely; it's a workmanlike job, so I can't
point to obvious gaffes; still less could I suggest corrections.
     But besides action, we also have to consider "adventure".  I
figure an action-adventure has to give me some neat ideas or events or
surroundings.  It has to give me something I want to imagine myself
doing, or something that is really fascinating even if negative somehow
(frightening, say).
     And in that respect, I can point to HIGHLANDER 3's scenery, its
backdrops.  There is *always* a nice background or setting throughout
the film.  A desert in Morocco, barren hills in Scotland, a plush
apartment in New York with windows on a cityscape, the high-tech plant
in Japan, a sort of surreal industrial facility for the climax.  Neat!
We've got the setting, now what *action* will take place there?  How am
I going to imagine myself being the *hero* in that neat, impressive
scene?
     But *most* of the time, the action doesn't use the "dramatic"
backgrounds.  It doesn't give me any feel of giants battling in a
more-than-ordinary world.  And there's nothing to give me some *idea*
or *emotion* to go along with the background, not for me, not for the
characters on screen.
     Take a fairly important scene--where MacLeod and one of the
henchvillains are in a hospital laundry room.  It's a drying room with
sheets hanging everywhere, so they can't see each other.  (True, most
hospitals probably got rid of their drying rooms sometime during the
administration of Dwight Eisenhower, but I've agreed to overlook mere
practical impossibility.)
     Such a scene might be very high-tension if we were dealing, say,
with a kid, or someone really vulnerable.  We'd be trying to look
around every corner.  Where's the bad guy now?!
     But we've got an *immortal* here!  The *hero*!  Against a complete
no-name!  I'm sorry, dramatic tension is hard for me under such
circumstances.  All those nifty backgrounds--unfortunately, that's
all they are.
     Take the New York apartment in an apparently squalid neighborhood.
That's a pretty "archetypal" image--think of Fu Manchu.  Glamor and
power hidden in the slums.  But HIGHLANDER 3 doesn't do anything with
it.  It's just another place along the way.
     And it's the same with the other nifty backgrounds.  First, as
noted, I didn't feel much interaction between scenery and action.  But
second, they're all sorts of different scenery.  I didn't come a way
with any image that tied up the film for me.  It's like we do this
scene here, and then we do that scene there.  Nothing continues.
Nothing grows.
     To see how other people have handled something, think of the first
GHOSTBUSTERS.  They repeatedly showed the art-deco apartment building
where we *knew* something creepy was going on.  The building was always
highlighted against dark, stormy skies.  For more than a year after
seeing it, I would look up at certain apartment buildings, with the sky
and clouds behind them, and I'd experience the neat little thrill of
the GHOSTBUSTERS building.
     With neat backdrops all over, HIGHLANDER 3 gave me no such image.
     Is it that the filmmakers were just lazy?  Would it have been too
much work to tie together the dramatic background with the action of
the flick?  Would it have been too much work to throw in something to
show why someone *had* to do something or why they didn't *want* to do
something else?
     In fact, though, something else *might* be going on--almost an
*anti*-action-adventure theme.  Suffice it to say that that with all
the wide-open possibilities, the fights all take place in constrained
circumstances--the cave and the drying room, for instance.  I can see
that they might have been chosen for emotional or symbolic or dramatic
purposes.  (For me, the cave is the most notable, and the most
successful scene for a fight.)
     But they're still all sort of close-in, sort of claustrophobic.
Is this larger-than-life?  Is this heroic?  Or is it some
shrink-influenced imagery?  Maybe it was trying to give some image of
descending into the dark corners of the psyche to engage in conflict.
If so, it was only half done--note that I said "sort of"
claustrophobic.
     In any event, at the end, it feels like everybody just gave up.
We get the climax, and then after a few minutes it ends, just *ends*.
I don't feel like doing a spoiler here, so all I can do is say that the
ending was for me incredibly unsatisfying.  I just sat there and said
"What?"  We went through the whole flick to get *this*!?
     The promos have said that this is the last HIGHLANDER, that
Lambert is "retiring" the MacLeod character.  If so, the ending is more
disappointing, because with all the questions it raised in my mind, at
least I could figure it was rational if it was leaving the field open
for HIGHLANDER 4.  (And there were other possible sequel threads left
untied, too.)
     Note, again, that I thought that this was a pleasant, enjoyable
flick.  It was workmanlike, smoothly done.  It didn't lag, it kept me
involved.
     Nonetheless, just by thinking about some of the potentials that
littered the landscape--the landscape itself, the backgrounds, being
collectively one of them--I can feel disappointed.
     In that light, I can disagree with but understand the vehemence
with which some people have panned HIGHLANDER 3.  (The reaction on
alt.cult-movies has *not* been generous!)
     On the basis of what HIGHLANDER 3 actually delivered to us, the
condemnations have been unfounded.  But if we think of the film's
*potential*, then the outrage is understandable.  We got a nice,
pleasant film.  The film itself indicates that we could have gotten a
*lot* more.

Title
Review for Last Action Hero (1993)
     If you leave your expectations behind, you'll find LAST ACTION
HERO to be an enjoyable film worth recommending to others.  If you like
a movie that explores the fantasy/reality dichotomy, you'll find an
*extremely* enjoyable flick worth at least a second viewing.
     And if you like movies that allow layers of interpretation where
one level unfolds to another, then you may wind up boring your friends
with continued discoveries.  (If, further, you're a movie freak who
enjoys humorous references to other films, watch it with a friend who's
similarly minded.  You can compare notes afterwards.)
     Well, for those of us in the States, this is post mortem.  But
I've heard one too many comment from folks who seem to have seen a
totally different LAST ACTION HERO than I saw.  If nothing else, maybe
some folks in Europe will benefit from a different point of view.
     The story is probably known, but it can be recapped briefly:
     Danny (Austin O'Brien) is a fan of Jack Slater (Arnold
Schwarzenegger) movies.  He gets two gifts from Nick (Robert Prosky), a
theater projectionist: one, being allowed to sneak in on a
pre-screening (at midnight) of the latest Jack Slater flick; and two, a
"magic" ticket given to the projectionist when he was kid by none other
than Houdini.
     The ticket has "a mind of its own" and throws Danny right into the
film.  He and Jack must deal with a gang lord (played by Anthony Quinn)
and his hit man Benedict (Charles Dance) as they plan to pull off a
major slaughter of the competition.  Benedict will get hold of the
ticket and find that our world (Danny's) is a place where "bad guys can
*win*."  Jack and Danny have to defeat him.
     One thing about expectations becomes obvious at the outset: this
ain't an action flick.  And yet it's not *not*-an-action-flick.  It
might better be called an action-flick flick.
     Those who expect a satire of action flicks will be only partially
satisfied.  The spoofing of the genre is coming from people who
basically *like* action flicks.  And Danny is the chief representative
of that crowd.  As he settles down to his first viewing of the new Jack
Slater flick, he *knows the rules*.  Watching the Jack Slater film's
first explosion, Danny practically lists out the body count before we
even see what's really happened.
     If it's all so predictable, some might wonder why he bothers to
go.  It's not novelty of plot; presumably there's *something else*.  We
never get told what *he* thinks the something else is in the Jack
Slater flick.  But LAST ACTION HERO's something else is Danny himself
and his relation to the Slater film (*and* to LAST ACTION HERO).
     As LAST ACTION HERO progresses, there are two quite separate
"lines" going: the first is the plot of the Jack Slater flick that
Danny is trapped in.  The second -- the something else -- is a sort of
dialogue between Danny and Jack.  Danny repeatedly tries to prove to
Jack that they're in a movie.  For instance, he points out that there's
an *animated cat* at police headquarters.  And he points out that all
the telephone numbers begin with 555 -- which allows only 9,999
possible phone numbers for millions of people in Los Angeles alone.
     The interesting thing is that from Jack's perspective, there's a
perfectly plausible reply: he knows the cat is there -- the cat is a
*good cop*.  And they have *area codes*!  Nonetheless, Jack does seem
to recognize that this kid has something.  Danny knows things he should
have no means of knowing.
     An important point is reached when Danny writes something on a
piece of paper, shows it to Jack, and asks him to say the word.  Jack
won't.  Of course, he won't -- he *can't*.  This is rated PG!
     Although nothing is said of this, my own conclusion is that Danny
has hit a weak point in Jack's logical armor: why *can't* he say it?
Jack's expression is one of confusion and consternation.
     For his part, however, Danny is recognizing that the movie is in
some sense *real*.  At one point the villain is escaping in his car;
Danny, on a girl's bike, decides it's the time to play chicken.  After
all, this is a movie: the car will swerve to avoid him, and it'll
crash.  Right?
But as he pedals on, something dawns on him:
He's *expendable*!  So *he* swerves and crashes!
     Danny has recognized this may be a movie, but he's *in* it.  He's
not immortal.  Even if this is a movie, he still doesn't want to get
killed.  He has to *act* as if it's real, because in some sense it
*is*.
     Well, it's fun to have a movie let you think about how fantasy and
reality work together.  But the "dialogue" between Danny and Jack (and
Jack's world) is not all there is.
     First, we may well be learning more about Jack's world than
customarily shows up on the screen.  His apartment is empty and
barren.  He gets a store clerk to call him at headquarters so people
will think his ex-wife is still interested.  She ain't.
     But, if there's a reality behind the fantasy, what about
"reality"?  What about Danny's New York?
     When Benedict gets hold of the ticket, he uses it to go to the
"real world."  From his perspective, it's not the real world, it's
simply a parallel universe.
     Well, if there's a reality behind the fantasy, there's also a
fantasy behind the reality.  Sooner or later, it must dawn on us that
we're *watching a movie*.  The only historical/cinematic analogy I can
think of is the Roy Rogers type of westerns compared to the "Gunsmoke"
type.  Gunsmoke *looked* real, but it was still a fantasy.
     Danny's New York superficially looks real.  And when Jack gets hit
there, it *hurts*.  But there are tell-tale signs all over.  Take only
one example (of many): We get at one point a virtual sea of
*immaculate* cabs!  And they all seem available!  Yeah, this is the New
York I have seen.  Yeah, right away.
     The time in New York apparently disappointed a number of critics
and viewers.  But if you see it as learning about the fantasy behind
the reality, it's one of the most pleasing sections of the film.  It's
where the "dialogue" gets wrapped up.
     As some have noted, LAST ACTION HERO did pretty well -- but *not*
in terms of expectations or dollar investment.  (It remains to be seen
whether European audiences can bring it into the black.)  I think that
the problem is that it's a "niche-breaker."  As I said above, it's not
an action flick, but it's not *not*-an-action-flick.
     Action-flick fans probably saw it once, thought it was okay, but
not TERMINATOR, and didn't see it again.  Or worse still, expecting
TERMINATOR, felt let down.
     People who can't stand action flicks probably stayed away on
principle.
     In the "middle" we have the critics -- people who spend most of
their time bewailing Hollywood's reliance on predictable niches -- and
the rest of the time savaging any film that doesn't fall into a
predictable niche.
     Unfortunately, people who can't stand action flicks are frequently
the sort of people who pay attention to critics.
     My own litmus test of LAST ACTION HERO's potential was a woman who
usually likes relatively "serious" films.  A Schwarzenegger flick would
*not* be on her must-see list.  But, having heard my praise, and being
in a spur-of-the-moment mood, she and her husband saw it.  They both
enjoyed it -- and more than the serious film they'd been looking
forward to (THE FIRM).
     First, I haven't got into all the "references" in LAST ACTION
HERO.  I'll give one that I didn't notice the first time.  Early on,
Danny watches a Roadrunner cartoon, and it includes the requisite
product from ACME, where *everything* comes from in Roadrunner
cartoons.  After Danny's thrown into the flick, villains are throwing
dynamite sticks.  What's the label on the side of the box?  Yup,
"ACME."
     LAST ACTION HERO is packed with these.  If you don't see them, you
don't lose anything.  If you *do* see them, they're freebie extras.
Watch it with a friend; compare notes.
     (For independent research: what's the significance of the title?)
     Next, I have been told that Schwarzenegger cannot act.  What he
has, I'm told, is "presence."  Well, perhaps what that means is that
he's really a character actor, that he has a range into which he fits
comfortably, but the range is not as wide as other, better, actors.
     As far as acting and presence are concerned, I particularly
enjoyed watching "Jack" confront "Arnold" in the the "real" New York.
If Schwarzenegger can't act, he can at least change presence at will.
There were two different people on screen as far as I was concerned.
If that's not acting, it's a good substitute.
     Finally, I do hope that LAST ACTION HERO does well in Europe.
Maybe if the film makes money, however little, more people in Hollywood
will be willing to break niches.  To do that, however, they're going to
have to figure ways to circumvent the critics and the other media, and
to get to those audiences (or audience segments) who are apt to like a
particular flick.
     I can't really blame the TERMINATOR fans who didn't like LAST
ACTION HERO.  People have preferences and that's that.  In music, I
happen to like (among others) Renaissance, late Romantics, the 30s
"sweet" sound, and hard rock.  Statistically, however, folks who like
one are apt to dislike or be bored by *at least* one of the others.
But I get tired when people seem to think that they can only defend
their music by putting down someone else's.
     In film, the jerks are not those who like one genre or another.
The jerks are the critics who get locked into niches while pretending
to be above them all.
     Alas, poor Arnold, you did a flick that was meant to be seen by
people who tend to pay attention to critics!

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
My form of "rating": After watching NATURAL BORN KILLERS, I felt sort
     of soiled; I wasn't sure what I'd been in contact with, but I was
     upset that it was contaminating the world.  Was that because
     NATURAL BORN KILLERS brought me in contact with the spirit of the
     "real" America?  Or was it because NATURAL BORN KILLERS brought me
     in contact with the mind of its director/co-writer Oliver Stone?
     I leave that up to you to decide.
     [A version of this review previously appeared in the December 1994
     issue of The Curmudgeon (4505 University Way, N.E., Box 555,
     Seattle WA 98105).]
     The story opens with Mickey and Mallory Knox (Woody Harrelson and
Juliette Lewis) at a roadside bar out in the great American desert
someplace.  Mallory puts a record on the jukebox and starts dancing
(well, writhing) to it.  A yokel joins in, and gets fresh.  So Mallory
starts beating him senseless as a prelude to killing him; she and
Mickey kill everyone in and around the bar, leaving only one alive to
tell the tale--and make sure their names are known.  Nice kids, huh?
     We then learn a little about them.  Mallory is the daughter of a
sleazo (Rodney Dangerfield) who used her for sex since who knows when.
Mickey apparently also has a history of molestation.  But the big thing
is that they love each other and kill everyone they meet.
     So, of course, they're big in the media, particularly with
"American Maniacs"--a tabloid TV show hosted by Wayne Gale (Robert
Downey, Jr.).  And they have zillions of fans world-wide.  As one
observes, no one wants to endorse mass murder--but if that's what you
*are*, then you'd certainly want to be Mickey and Mallory.
     When they're eventually captured, the media circus heats up even
more.  And after they're convicted, Gale will bring his show right to
the prison to interview them.
     I usually like to think in terms of the story, the characters, the
acting--who does what, when, and so forth, how much I liked this
character or that.  But NATURAL BORN KILLERS is one flick that
practically screams that those things are trivial.  The *story* is
subordinate to the *film*, and so is everything else.
     Take where we learn about about Mallory's Happy Home Life.  We get
it presented as a TV sitcom, with its own opening title, background
music, and laff track!  We get a family presided over by a real sicko
with an ineffectual wife (Edie McClurg), and the characters skate a
line between what might happen in reality and how it might be presented
by a sitcom as sick as Mallory's pop.
     And that, brothers and sisters, is a relatively *realistic*
element of NATURAL BORN KILLERS!  Throughout, we get every film-school
trick imaginable, every possible dredging of symbolism.  When Mickey
and Mallory are in a motel room, say, there'll be rear-projection
images showing film clips from World War II, from Westerns, from
perhaps Mickey's childhood, from sitcoms.  Periodically during the
film, a character will flash on the screen drenched in blood, or
banners will be projected onto the characters, labeling them demons or
whatnot.
     The film will switch from color to grainy video black and white,
to shots at any angle that strikes the director's fancy.  When we see
the TV news following Mickey and Mallory's travels, it may be sort of
documentary style.  Or it may be inserted into a 50s advertizement of a
family dressed up, surrounding the TV--all black and white except for
the news story on the little screen in color.
     NATURAL BORN KILLERS is a film that insists, that screams, that
"*Every* frame is *filled* with *meaning*!  (You have to say that right
-- intensely, showing your commitment, your *sensitivity*--dwell on
each word: "*filled* with *meaning*".  Practice it.)
     OK.  So what's the meaning?  That people who grow up watching
"Leave It to Beaver" are going (if male) to rape their kids?  Or (if
female) to do nothing while hubby does so?
     OK, so let's ignore the surreal stuff for a moment.  How's about
"satire"?
     OK, I guess I can call it satire.  We're assured by the press kit,
and a sermonette from Stone, that this is a "satire on violence and the
American media".
     Mickey and Mallory are clearly presented as creeps, but at least
we get some idea why.  Other than them (with one quasi-exception),
there is no one (repeat: no one) for whom the film gives us any
substantial reason to be sympathetic.  The people killed on screen are
all either: 1) ciphers, complete unknowns, just momentary faces; 2)
dorks and yokels; or 3) creeps and sickos of various varieties.
     The one quasi-exception is an Indian (Russell Means).  He may be a
sympathetic character, but he's hardly part of the ordinary world.  He
speaks no English, has visions, and rattlesnakes don't bite him.  (He
has a grandson, who also speaks no English, to ask him questions, so
that the subtitled conversation can fill us in on mystical details.)
Means projects a nice, stable, laid-back character--but one who is
clearly meant not to be part of 1990s America.
     America is the hordes yearning for Mickey and Mallory to off more
nobodies.
     (Ollie Stone's not anti-American, though.  The whole *world* joins
in the fascination--particularly those silly, air-headed Japanese.)
     Lined up against Mickey and Mallory, the forces of Law and Order
are not exactly Marshall Dillon.  Jack Scagnetti (Tom Sizemore), who's
tracking them, is a self-promoting hack.  He has, let's say, a certain
desire to dominate women.  Warden Dwight McCluskey (Tommy Lee Jones)
must go to the same hair stylist that does Ace Ventura, Pet Detective.
(McCluskey might not be realistic enough for that flick, however.)
     Well, if this is satire, it's about the level one would expect
from a high-school or freshman writing class.  Except that high-school
kids might actually have fun making everyone look like total jerks.
     Oliver Stone does not appear to be having fun.  This is serious
business.  The promos make it all too clear that NATURAL BORN KILLERS
is a Statement, a Warning to America.
     All right, let's give Stone his Statement.  He has obviously
absorbed pop culture, and turned it on its head.  Time after time,
Mickey and Mallory are in situations much like those in teen flicks and
sitcoms.  But in those flicks, the hero or heroine might sock or slap
somebody, or just throw back a snappy one-liner.  In NATURAL BORN
KILLERS, they kill somebody.  But because of our complete lack of
identification with the victims, the killings are "distant"--without
any impact except as devices to move the action along.
     So, it certainly looks like Stone wants us to enjoy this on a
superficial level.  Then, presumably, when we look back, we'll see that
we, too, have been sucked into the whole pop culture of death and
slaughter.  And we'll repent.
     Doesn't this sound vaguely familiar?
     Particularly on film, wasn't a lot of soft-core porno written and
marketed this way?  Filled with "oh the shame" and "warnings to youth"?
     I think that NATURAL BORN KILLERS has been misrepresented as a
satire of the media.  As I said, *everybody* in the film is a creep;
the media types are merely *celebrity* creeps--just like Mickey and
Mallory.
     But it would be fun to analyze NATURAL BORN KILLERS as a critique
of the media, since the film is so self-referential.  The old soft-core
marketing schtick is merely one aspect to look at.  Don't the
tabloid-TV types tell us how opposed they are to what they're hyping?
I think it would be interesting to examine NATURAL BORN KILLERS to see
to what extent it can be criticized as being what Stone claims to
satirize and condemn.
     Unfortunately, though, after reading Stone my thoughts turned to
something darker than the usual media incompetence and
self-righteousness.
     Throughout NATURAL BORN KILLERS, one explanation of Mickey and
Mallory is "fate".  We are bombarded with the past as backdrop to the
present.  Mickey himself states it expressly: He and Mallory are just
Natural Born Killers.  Their unremitting violence is fated.  Virtually
all those who were killed surely had something dark enough in their
past that they deserved to be butchered.
     Maybe Stone is just giving Mickey some slimy self-justification.
But those ideas are almost nowhere contradicted and sometimes
explicitly affirmed by the film.  To the extent the film offers us an
out, it is that "Love beats the demon".  Stone himself cites this line,
saying that "I do believe there is love at the end."
     *But what about the killings?*  For at least a hundred years,
certain voices have announced a fascination with violence--that
violence alone can cleanse us of the things that drag us down.  That
humanity can rise above its grubby little present only by passing
through a river of blood, a wall of fire.  Those who kill--joyously
and without restraint--will rise purer and stronger than any before
them.  They will be triumphant--purged, redeemed, the truly innocent
and free, truly capable of love and exultation.
     Stone, immediately after citing the "love beats the demon" line,
closes his sermon with:

Title
Review for Getting Even with Dad (1994)
My form of "rating": On the first viewing, I alternated between
     laughter and being pleasantly wired.  (Nothing hyper, mind you,
     just a pleasant "What's gonna happen next!?"  [Let it be noted
     that I get wired easily.])  On the second viewing, the humor
     predominated.  (I almost became the most dreaded theater
     companion--starting to laugh *before* the joke!)
The primary dilemma: This is one flick where reviewers don't have to
     give any opinions of their own.  For many of you, I can simply
     list some data, and I'll convince you that this is a flick you'll
     probably like a lot or probably hate intensely.  Datum: It
     co-stars *Macaulay Culkin*.  Datum: It has echoes (not very
     strong) of the HOME ALONE sagas.  There are other similar datums,
     too, but these two should be enough for now.
     You might already have heard the story, but here it is.  Ray (Ted
Danson) has planned the perfect heist: gold coins to be lifted with the
aid of two partners--Bobby (Saul Rubinek) and Carl (Gailard Sartain).
True, their last escapade got them four years in Folsom, but at least
Ray used the time well--to learn cake decorating, which he now does
for a living in San Francisco.
     Unfortunately, the flaw in the ointment is that Ray's son Timmy
(Culkin) has been dropped on him for a week.  Ray's estranged wife died
a few years ago, and Timmy has been living with Ray's sister Kitty.
Well, she's getting married, and dumps Timmy for a week.  Ray and
company pull off the heist, and merely have to sit on the coins for a
week while their fence gets cash.  Regrettably, Timmy is on to them,
purloins the coins, and holds them for blackmail: a week with Ray
actually acting like a father--taking him to a ball game, the
aquarium, roller coasters, the works.
     Much of the film's comedy will be based on Bobby and Carl tagging
along, trying to second-guess Timmy about the coins and to keep up with
him and Ray on the activities.  (I rather liked a "dramatic",
slow-motion moment--during a game of miniature golf!)
     Oh, by the way, through a fluke, the cops are on to Ray & Co.
They and Timmy will be tailed all week by Terese (Glenne Headly).  Need
we say that Something Will Develop Between Ray and Terese?
     Now, looking at that description, you might feel you can psyche
the story out: very 90s, very single-parent family, very father-son
bonding, very dealing with justifiable resentment.  (With heavy doses
of sentiment--and a little discreet smooching between Ray and
Terese.)
     Well, if that's what you want, you ain't gonna get it.  (Except
for the slight smooching--and the sentiment rush, which is held off
till the climax.)  GETTING EVEN WITH DAD may take place in 1994, but
its heart and soul are a lot earlier.  If I had to give a date, I'd say
1949: It still has some of the sweetness of 30s flicks, before it
became frozen in the 50s, but with a certain 40s realism.
     GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is in two great traditions of 30s and 40s
flicks: the crook with a heart of gold, and the kid out looking for a
parent.  I think it may pass for 90s because it does indeed take place
here.  The 30s and 40s kids were looking for an *additional* parent: a
wife for Dad, or a husband for Mom (or two separate kids conspiring to
get their respective parents married to each other).  That's too
optimistic for today.  Yes, if there's a possibility of getting Dad
hooked up with Terese, Timmy's not going to pass it by--but it's not
really his main goal.  Timmy's expectations are scaled down to 90s
reality.  He'll settle for one *real* parent.  (The guy his aunt Kitty
is marrying is a dork.)
     Timmy is not terribly interested in Working Out His Feelings.  He
knows what they are, they've been painful, and he doesn't deceive
himself about them or put on a show that it was really nothing.  But
Timmy, like his predecessors 50 and 60 years ago, has a very
down-to-earth, survival-motivated way of looking at things.  He and
they are instinctive little conservatives.  Families *ought* to have
breakfast in the morning; they *ought* to do things together; there are
*standards*, thank you; and we (kids) are going to see that things are
done as they ought to be done!
    Those kids were more apt to be concerned about the moral
implications of decent cooking and a clean house than about
"fulfillment".
     Timmy doesn't *need* to "bond" with Ray: Ray is his *father*.
Timmy just needs to wake Ray up to the fact.
     But it's not enough for Timmy just to get a full-time father.
Timmy has a 60-years-ago moral point of view together with 90s (or 40s)
realism.  He loves his father, but not his father's plans.  A) He
thinks stealing is *wrong*.  B) He's convinced that Ray will fail.
     For Ray, of course, the heist is his big chance: to own his own
bakery, to be secure, to make something of himself.  For Timmy, that
just doesn't cut it:
90s cynicism in the service of 30s ethics.
     Now, having noted what I think are GETTING EVEN WITH DAD's obvious
antecedents, I don't think it's any criticism to say that the show's
writers (Tom S. Parker and Jim Jennewein) are making no pretense to
originality.  Any of us who demand originality after meeting Ray & Co.
in the opening are given pretty explicit warning when Culkin first
appears on film.  We get a gentle nod to "Calvin and Hobbes"--as
Timmy voice-overs while he videotapes Kitty and her intended, Wayne:
     Radical originality, it's not.  But if you want to have fun
figuring out what's going to happen next, then GETTING EVEN WITH DAD
will give you ample opportunity.  That scene, for instance, sets up
Timmy's use of the video camera, which will be important later on.  And
this sort of thing happens again and again.
     GETTING EVEN WITH DAD is sort of a mystery in reverse--we know
whodunit, and the film honors the overall expectations we have for a
film like this.  But the writers sprinkle clues for what's going to
happen later.  Some, as in any mystery, are blind alleys; others are
important.  (I suspect that the writers figured they had to please both
kids and adults.  Following the "clues" is an added attraction for the
adults without distracting the kids.)
     Note, though, that this is one of those datums: I figure the
writers were having fun, and I'm glad to be in on it.  Others may think
the writers were telegraphing their punches and were just too lazy to
make everything seem original and unexpected.
     In all this, each member of the cast seems to shine.  True, they
are all playing stock characters in some sense.  But stock characters
are probably closer to life than we wish to admit.  Culkin appears
simply effortless as the bright, calculating 11-year-old.  He's
supposed to be bright--his last Stanford score was in "the 95th
percentile".  (Didn't they used to say "the upper fifth percentile"?)
But he's not SuperKid.  He gives us a whole kid--eager, calculating,
worried, stubborn, cheerful, sad, serious, or wise-ass as needs be.  I
*liked* his character.  (Those with 11-year-olds around might not find
it so so easy!)
     Ted Danson sort of surprised me.  I didn't merely like his
character, I figured there was some *weight* behind this guy Ray.
Timmy may not believe his old man can be an effective criminal, but
Danson makes it perfectly believable.  Even though I *knew* the cops
were dogging his heels every second, he still seemed just to have it
all together.  The cops had nothing but dumb luck in their
favor--maybe Ray *could* pull it off!
     Of course, maybe Timmy merely realized that Ray didn't have the
ultimate ruthlessness or coldness a criminal really needs.  There might
be no conflict between my feeling for Ray's competence and Timmie's
feeling for his incompetence *as a criminal*.
     In fact, the only thing that argued against Ray's criminal
competence was his choice of partners: Rubinek as Bobby makes a lovely
small-time hood: poor workmanship but big ideas ("A *moving* armored
car!  That is great--we need major firepower--a couple of AK-47s--they
got these--these--bazookas, man....")  An echo of the crooks in the
HOME ALONEs, he falls on it when he tries to outwit Timmy.
     On the hand, Sartain as Carl basically *knows* he doesn't know
very much--and does so with good cheer and sweetness.  Bright, he's
not, but he shows an underlying common sense.  A clown maybe, but not a
fool.
     Finally, Headly projects a very nice nerdiness as Terese.  She's
attractive, but just radiates a personality that really *is* more
comfortable "dressed like a meter maid".  When she dresses more sexily,
she seems a little out of place somehow.  It's totally appropriate when
she lies that she's a kindergarten teacher.  She has the brains, the
intellect of a detective, but should cops start falling in love with
suspects?  (Interestingly, it's Timmy that first gets her attention.
Ah, the primacy of the nesting impulse!)
     So, like I said, what I described as good may very well convince
some of you that you'd probably hate GETTING EVEN WITH DAD.
     To finish up on that note, I'll only point out that--from the
reverse-mystery perspective--all the threads are tied up neatly at
the end.  Well, *almost* all.  There are a couple of strands that I
still have questions about.  I don't think there'll be any sequel, but
*I* certainly wouldn't mind!

Title
Review for North (1994)
     My form of "rating": NORTH kept me chuckling throughout, with a
     suitable number of guffaws, and a continual presence of neat
     things to grin at or think about.  I just got the sound track and
     book; now how do I get the tee-shirt and baseball cap?!
     NORTH is practically an archetype, a fable, a myth, of an
     important set of experiences in growing up--when you realize
     that your parents aren't perfect, and that other families and
     cultures are sort of strange, and so are you!
     Based on the 1984 kid's book of the same name by Alan Zweibel, the
     film takes an unabashedly kid's-eye view of the world.  If you
     want a traditional category to describe NORTH, it's
     "whimsy"--utterly fantastic things presented as if they were
     completely ordinary.
     My suspicion is that responses to NORTH will depend on how well
     people can cope with a whimsical and kiddish perspective, *and*
     on how they have dealt with the experiences on which the film is
     based.
     (Why anyone would *not* find NORTH *at least* a pleasant
     diversion is beyond me.  I suppose I can "understand" how someone
     might have a negative reaction, but it's something I can't
     "experience".  When those negative reactions are extreme, I begin
     to wonder whether something else is afoot--something more than
     merely a bizarre response to a funny, well-made flick.)
     At eleven years old, North (Elijah Wood) is The Perfect Kid.
Bright, athletic, the works.  He is popular with the other kids even
while their parents hold him up as a rebuke to any failing.  ("*North*
*flosses*.")  But his own parents (Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Jason
Alexander) are so wrapped up in themselves and their jobs, they don't
even seem to *notice* him, much less appreciate him.  His schoolwork is
suffering, his Little League performance, everything.  He fails at
trying to break through their self-absorption.  He's got to do
something.
     Prompted by an idea that comes up during a conversation with a
department-store Easter Bunny (Bruce Willis, who also narrates), North
begins thinking of becoming a free agent.  In short order, his friend
Winchell (Mathew McCurley), editor of the school paper, has put him
together with Arthur Belt (Jon Lovitz), a shyster lawyer.  North sues!
He wins!  But Judge Buckle (Alan Arkin) rules that he has to be in the
arms of his new (or old) parents by noon on Labor Day, or it's The
Orphanage for him.
     It's July.  Now, he has to sort through all the candidate parents
who are flooding him with first-class tickets to come to them.
     While he globe trots, Winchell is making his move.  Parents are
hysterical with fear.  If North can do it, why not *their* kids?
Winchell is building a movement out of this--out of the parents'
fears, and out of the kids' dawning sense of power.  (Will the voting
age be lowered to seven?!)
     So, we get to see prospective parents from Texas, Hawaii, Alaska,
China, Africa, France, and others back in the States.
     I don't think it's any spoiler to say that North will have to deal
with less than ideal candidates.  Even when they *look* ideal, there'll
be personal problems, personal quirks, and cultural differences, just
for starters.  Parallel to that are the implications of North the real
kid becoming a Symbol--not a *player* in the Game of Power, but a
*prize*, a *precondition*.
     Well, how will it end?  What are the candidate parents really
like?  Who among them will be the lucky winners?  How will North factor
in to Winchell's growing power and lust for world domination?
     In NORTH, Wood plays perhaps the only character who might be
"real."  He has to deal with a wacko universe, and still respond,
believably, in a relatively sane way.  Wood's essential reality gives a
center of gravity to the whole film--in the context of everyone else's
lunacy.
     Everyone else is either a kid's perspective of what adults are
"really" like--or what many (whether kid or adult) would really *like*
to be if they had the chance.  McCurley's Winchell is, well, a sleaze.
A creep with a certain kind of charm and intelligence, Winchell is
sneaky, underhanded, treacherous, power hungry, devious, and dangerous,
perhaps even a genuine fiend--in other words, I enjoyed McCurley's
performance immensely.
     Lovitz's attorney Belt is a lot like Winchell--except without
things like intelligence and "charm".  Therefore he's less dangerous.
He's a perfect grown up to be used as a pawn by Winchell.
     Willis, besides narrating, shows up on the scene in a number of
guises--such as ranch hand, beach bum, stand-up comic.  He has a nice,
easy-going, off-handed detachment.  Removed from everything, he mainly
gives North the opportunity to say what's on his mind and to bring his
choices out into the open where he can think about them.
     Besides those characters, there is an army of cameos.  I'll
mention some (not all!) names later, but if the names aren't always
familiar, the faces are.
     Also, as a bonus for adults, there are lots of nifty little points
integrated into the film.  For instance, for independent research:
Where have we seen the house in Texas?  What product placement is
incredibly blatant--and yet true and to the point!
     From the opening credits, there's a sense that NORTH is *not*
gonna be giving us an "ordinary" picture of reality.  As the credits
roll, the camera takes us around what is apparently North's room.  But
it looks like a department-store window display of the perfect
room--packed with toys, trains, and what-not, in an impossibly tidy
arrangement that no one could really walk through without disturbing
something.
     The room doesn't figure in the story, but if it's any consolation,
its surreality is relatively realistic compared to the rest of the
film.  What NORTH gives us will be painted with a very broad brush.
Remember, it's based on a kid's book, a very whimsical one.  (Think
about the names of most the characters for a while.)  And the original
author, Zweibel, joined with Andrew Scheinman in writing the
screenplay, and was co-producer, along with director Rob Reiner.
     I just picked up a copy of the book, and while I haven't had time
to more than glance at it, both book and movie seem to give us similar
ideas.
     I'm sort of surprised that I haven't seen more comments about
cultural stereotypes in NORTH.  North's parents fall into a "suburban
Jewish" role; Ma and Pa Tex (Reba McIntire and Dan Ackroyd) are into
*Big*ness; the Alaskans (Kathy Bates, Graham Green, and grandpa, Abe
Vigoda) live in an electric-operated *igloo*!  (And in summer, the day
is six months long!)
     But more to the point is the personal baggage that at least *some*
of the parents carry.  Without, I hope, doing spoilers, we get a clear
drawing of things lots of kids have to live with in their parents:
North's own parents are wrapped up in their work, some of the
candidates act from insecurities, or want to lay a trip on their
Perfect Kid.  Others are just from different planets, culturally.
     Well, I can't speak for anyone else, but it certainly sounds
familiar to *me*.
     Maybe the burbs insulate some people from cultural differences,
but that wasn't the case in small-town Rhode Island, with lots of
nationalities clearly visible.  And in my own family, we had Scotch
Calvinists and Southern-Irish Protestants as well as Catholics to deal
with.
     Yeah, other nationalities do things that are weird, don't they?
But don't *we* look a bit weird to them, too?  And doesn't the same
thing happen with people in different classes?  I can remember my
parents discussing or explaining to me how they dealt with people from
different worlds.
     So, also, I came to realize that those around me, including my
parents, were a bit messed up--quite independent of class or culture.
Fears, limitations, quirks, they were all there.  And if I mentioned
them, my parents' response was sort of "Well, of course!" That's just
part of life, isn't it?  Isn't *everyone* a little messed up?  And
sometime or another, I came to see that even *I* was part of that!
     NORTH gives us all those ways in which we're different, and weird,
and messed up--writ large and presented as fun.
     On one level, NORTH gives us a world that is plainly ridiculous.
Its connection with "reality" is downright adversarial.  (I mean, if
NORTH is any indication, then there have been some *major* changes in
the situation in China since I last saw the news on the tube!)
     The rampant whimsy alone will be enough to bother some people.
But underneath the whimsy, is a view of life that can be seen as
radically dark, as unspeakably bleak.  It takes no effort to see that
NORTH recognizes serious questions of social order, death, and
alienation.  Also, think of the things we wanted as kids--and want as
grown-ups: attention, wealth, influence, a wonderful place to live.
North finds that they can come with a high emotional price tag.
     And in facing some really nice people, North has to admit that his
*own* limitations prevent him from accepting them as his parents.
     On one level, the message is stark: You're *alone*.  If you can
understand adults, you won't be able to rely on them.  And if you can
rely on them, you won't be able to understand them.  In the rare case
where you can both understand and rely on them, they'll still be alien
somehow.  And whether or not they're messed up, you've certainly got
problems yourself.
     Cheerful little message for kids, isn't it?  Yet it describes
facts of life we all have to deal with.  So what are we supposed to do
with that?
     Think of how the stereotypical Silent Generation, Boomer, and
X/Thirteener "ought" to respond when they find out that their parents
and other grown ups are messed up and there's lots of weird customs in
the world.
     The Silent Generation would try be Responsible Social Units, and
work to make everything tidy.  Or at least work to keep busy and make
money.
     Boomers would denounce all "stereotypes" as vicious lies and deny
the facts.  Alternatively, they'd go either blaming or self-condemning
or both; then they'd do therapy about it.
     Xers would whine about it and say it showed how rotten everything
was and showed why *their* lives were "dysfunctional"--a word the
Silents and Boomers gave them.
     True, those descriptions are strictly cartoons and cardboard.  But
they all agree that the weirdness and the dysfunctions are *very* big
deals indeed, and must be treated as such.
     Supposedly, however, there's a *fourth* generational type--the
same type as World War II's GI generation--the generation that got
dropped through a meat grinder.  The ones who survived came out to
produce the prosperity the the Silents matured in and Boomers grew up
in.  This is the generational type that will allegedly characterize
kids of Elijah Wood's age.  How would the cardboard GI generation
respond?
     I suggest they'd say, golly, that's too bad!  But ya can't let
little stuff like that get ya down!  C'mon!  We got a movie t'make!
(Break into big musical number of the sort they grew up on.)
     Less cardboardly and cartoonishly, they'd agree to the facts but
not do any big angst trip on them.  They'd try to deal with the
dysfunctions.  They'd probably *like* a lot of the simple weirdness,
and make movies that skewered every group possible.
     Stereotypes aside, of the four responses, which seems to make the
most sense?  And which does NORTH come closest to?  And how do you
think some people are going to deal with NORTH when they really come
from a different planet?
     Let's face it, NORTH might well be patently offensive to some
people for the very reasons others find it entertaining.  How did *you*
deal with waking up to the facts that *everyone* is messed up to some
extent?  If someone else's dysfunction was really major, was that cause
for self-doubt?  Or cause to feel sorrow for the person?
     And how did you deal with recognizing that some folks are just
*different*?  Was it a big deal?  Or was it just life?  Was it maybe
even sort of neat?
     I think I know how North the kid would answer those questions.
And I'm afraid I suspect how some of the critics of NORTH the movie
would answer them.

Title
Review for Corsa dell'innocente, La (1992)
My form of "rating": I think I "remembered" I was watching a film
    about two or three times.  And that was not to have thoughts or
    worries from outside intrude.  It was just, for a second or
    so, to realize how awed I was and then to be grabbed back into the
    film itself.  A second form of "rating" is to ask how many times
    images from a film pop up in my mind.  It's still happening with
    FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT, months after seeing it--images of
    innocence, vulnerability, and an incredible resolve.
     Fortunately, it's out on video now, and I'm afraid that few of you
would have been able to see FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT even if you'd known
about it.  It's distributed by MGM/UA; it wasn't at the "independent"
video store near where I live, but I was able to rent it at
Blockbusters.
     As far as the big screen is concerned, though, if other places
were like D.C., you would have had to check the individual theater
listings religiously--which is a habit of mine.  There were no ads,
no reviews.  That set my intuition alarms screaming, and I decided I
*had* to see it.
     Nonetheless, I want to thank James Berardinelli
(blake7@cc.bellcore.com) for his review in rec.arts.movies.reviews.  He
is both to be praised for reviewing it and congratulated for finding a
screen where it was playing.
     I have a quibble, however, in that I don't think he praised the
film *enough*, which is partially why I'm writing this.  But many of
you may find his review more balanced and informative than this one.
     Another reason I'm writing this review is that "Sight and Sound"
(U.K.) had a review that struck me as singularly off-base.  Even their
usually reliable synopsis mis-reported a crucial event on screen.  (See
"Comments requiring a spoiler," after the main review.)
     The center of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT is ten-year-old Vito (Manuel
Colao).  The men of his family are kidnappers and murderers in
Calabria; they murder two members of a competing family, then are
slaughtered in turn along with his mother, grandmother, sister, and
brother.  Vito sees some of this, sees all the bodies afterward.  He is
is able to hide and save himself.
     His father, left for dead, tells him to go to his brother, then
dies.  Vito goes to the cave where his brother is with a boy Vito's
age--Simone (Sandro Barletta), the only son of rich parents, who is
being held for ransom.  There he finds both dead, and is seen by a
member of the other family--a scar-faced, irrational goon (Federico
Pacifici) who will hunt him for the rest of the film.  He runs,
escapes.  He goes on the run to Rome, carrying the dead boy's
knapsack.  He's going to meet another member of the family, Orlando
(Lucio Zagaria), a cousin, I think.
     That pace will continue.  If he gets a period of peace or apparent
safety, it will be followed by more threat, more running.  In the
periods of relative calm, he will learn something about the
consequences of what his family has done, or we will learn something
about the murdered Simone.
     Many on the net, and among reviewers, thoroughly despise the HOME
ALONE sagas.  But they don't really investigate why these films were
and are so popular.  The critics of these films point out how unreal
they are, but fail to see that it is precisely the sheer impossibility
that makes them appealing.
     The HOME ALONEs do not so much ignore reality as defy it.  We know
what would have happened to us if we'd been in Kevin McAllister's
shoes: we'd have had a bullet in the head, and that would have been the
end of us and the flick.  The HOME ALONEs are not merely statistically
unlikely, they are intentionally impossible to the point of being
straightforward fantasy.
     FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT deals with a similar threat in a way that
*might* be possible.  Statistically, virtually all kids in situations
like Vito's are found and murdered with everyone else.
     But not *always*.  Kids do hide, do escape, do survive.
Throughout, FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT *might* be possible.  I found only
one place where probability was stretched.  (Discussing or refuting it
would be spoiler territory.)  But we should recognize that *all* such
films--*even* *if* *based *on* *fact*--stretch probability.
     Even in a film taken scrupulously from history, we have to realize
that history is written by survivors.  In certain situations, survival
is *improbable*.  "They" might have survived the battle, the attack,
the plague, or whatever, but *you and I* would probably be dead.  In an
odd way, a "realistic" story and a "fantasy" serve the same purpose--to
let us ignore or defy the facts, if only for a couple of hours.
     So is FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT merely another chase/adventure
flick?  Excitement, adventure, missing death by inches, so nothing is
really known until the end?  (FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT doesn't depend on
the usual adventure conventions.  There's no star power here.  Vito's
survival is in no way guaranteed.)
     The difference between FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT and an ordinary
chase flick is the character, the kid, Vito.  Colao is slightly built,
conveying both fragileness and stamina.  He has a hang-in-there spirit,
but no magic, no special skills.  More to the point, though, Vito is
*decent*--in a world that is fundamentally insane.
     But Vito is tied to all this horror by blood.  They're *his*
family that kidnapped a boy much like himself.  Seeing Simone's mother
and father (Francesca Neri and Jacques Perrin) on TV, he realizes more
and more what his family has really done, what they were really like.
     Berardinelli's review was good at pointing out this element of
morality.  But there's another dimension that I can't do much more than
mention without giving spoilers.  Vito is governed by *honor*.  There
are some things he cannot do even if he really wants to.  There are
other things he *must* do regardless of the consequences to himself.
     And part of that is *family* honor.  They're still his family.
His father may be a murderer, but he's still his father.  The others
are still his family.  What is Vito to do when he realizes that?  Turn
away from them in disgust or hatred?  Or embrace their corruption as
his own?  Those are certainly the options that loom largest for most
people confronting such a situation.
     *You and I* would either reject the criminal or embrace the
crime.  Vito, however, looks for something else.  And that may be the
most important improbability.
     We're looking at a kid who is called upon to play a role that most
adults would shrink from, and to confront real moral questions that
most adults would prefer to pretend aren't there.  And he does so, not
as a sort of stainless hero, but as a thoroughly ordinary kid somehow
rising to the need.
     Suffice it to say that whenever he seems to be acting foolishly or
pointlessly or suicidally, he is governed by honor.  He can't restore
Simone to life, but if he can do anything for the murdered boy's
parents, he must.  He *owes* it to them, and to his family.  To
Simone's parents, because they are his family's victims; to his family,
because by aiding the victims, he reduces their dishonor.
     If the moral aspect distinguishes FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT from an
adventure/chase film, it is also different from the ordinary
child-in-danger idea.  No one is out to save Vito.  Yes, well meaning
adults are there.  The authorities make it clear they're on his side,
but that family-honor thing will hardly help him see them as his
natural allies.  Except (perhaps) for the parents of Simone,
non-hostile adults are really just walk-ons in his life.  They offer
him choices or threats.  What happens is up to him.
     The director is Carlo Carlei; he and Gualtiero Rosella wrote the
screenplay.  The "Sight and Sound" review notes Carlei's "misguided
attempt to fuse the racy realism of American film-making with the rural
poetry of his native country's tradition."  I will certainly agree that
one powerful element of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT is the continual
juxtaposition of beautiful, apparently serene, surroundings with the
repeated violence aimed at destroying Vito.  (And the music by Carlo
Siliotto reinforces this dichotomy.)  But both the violence and the
beauty are the backdrop, not the heart.
     The heart is Vito, a completely vulnerable core of decency and
truth.  The continual attack by hatred and violence, the beauty of the
countryside, and the bustle of the city are meaningless without Vito.
And FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT works out Vito's choices with a logic that
takes that core of decency and truth seriously.
     Spoilers concern the film's climax and ending.
     I dislike writing a review of this sort of film after having seen
it only once.  I wrote most of this just after seeing it, but I decided
to pass on it, given Berardinelli's basically sound review.
     Then the April "Sight and Sound" had a synopsis that demanded a
reply.  Personal matters kept me from finishing the review, but now the
video is out--which verified my recollection of what appeared on
screen, as opposed to how it was described in "Sight and Sound."
     For those of you not familiar with "Sight and Sound," toward the
end there's a section of short reviews.  Along with each review is a
complete credit list and a complete synopsis.  Note: *synopsis*--not
one of those vague indications of subject matter we usually get, but a
brief telling of the *whole* story--your Compleat Spoiler.  It is one
of the magazine's towering virtues.  I frequently disagree with their
point of view, but if I had to suggest one film magazine on the planet,
it would probably be "Sight and Sound."
     But as priceless as I think their synopses are, they can be
dangerous, simply because they purport to be simple recitations of
events.  In this case, "Sight and Sound" majorly screwed up their
report of the ending of FLIGHT OF THE INNOCENT.  And that
misunderstanding appears to have colored the entire review by Peter
Aspden.
     Note: I don't think this was at all ill-willed, or dictated by
cinematic ideology.  And it could well be what Aspden *thought* was
presented on screen.  As we'll see, it's not that the conclusion is
simply wrong.  Rather it's one of three possibilities.  The mistake in
the review was to take something clearly presented as a "vision" and to
respond to as if it were a reported fact.
     In brief, the ending is that Scarface has convinced Simone's
father that Simone is alive.  The father has gone to pay the ransom,
and very likely to get himself killed.  Vito hides in the car.  There's
a confrontation.  Vito tells them that he told the father that Simone
is dead and not to bring the money.  After Vito promises to take them
to Orlando's money if the father is released, Vito, Scarface, and
Scarface's partner leave.  Vito tricks them, escapes for a while, but
is shot just before the police show up, killing Scarface and the
other.  The ambulance takes Vito away.  Then, in the words of the
"Sight and Sound" synopsis:
     "Finally, Vito sits at Simone's desk, having taken the place of
the dead child."
     The opinion piece picks this up, extensively criticizing Carlei
for such a sentimental ending.
     Notably, in the car, Vito has asked Scarface why he killed
Simone--and is told that his brother did it, to prevent Scarface from
getting him (and the ransom).  Vito's "blood guilt" is higher than we
or he thought.
     In any event, we see Vito shot, and fall.  We see him have a
vision of him and his family alive, reunited and happy, at a table with
Simone and his parents.  Simone says words from an astronomy book of
his that Vito has read: "Sea of Tranquility."
     Then we see the rescue workers take Vito away.  We see the father
standing by, thoughtful.  (We saw previously that the mother wanted to
keep Vito as what most of us would interpret as God's replacement for
Simone.)  Then we get a vision of Simone's desk, and Vito fades in --
*exactly* where we had previously see Simone as Vito envisioned him.
He turns, and smiles.
     Okay, doesn't that mean that Simone's parents took Vito in?
     The problem is that this is a *vision*, presumably Vito's.  And in
case there is any doubt that it is a vision, it is an almost *precise*
reprise of the vision that Vito had when he went into Simone's room.
There, the desk stands against the far wall.  Simone fades in, looking
thoughtful.  At the end, we see the same desk, although now Vito fades
in, smiling.
     "Sight and Sound" may reply that this can reinforce the
replacement idea.  Doesn't the first vision sort of predict it?  Isn't
Simone welcoming Vito home?
     Well, at least we have a less straightforward announcement of the
happy ending than the review would indicate.  But let's deal with what
are presented as facts on screen.  Yes, the father looks thoughtful.
But we have nothing more than that: adoption is only a *possibility*.
A more likely, "realistic" outcome is that Vito will be returned to the
children's home where the authority's put him.  (Because of a scene
there, we can view that as actually a rather happy ending, and not
opening all the more tragic possibilities of a boy who will always
remind his parents of the murdered Simone.)
     So, first, there are at least *two* possibilities.  The vision is
just that: Vito's hope, having as much reality as the one that
immediately preceded it, his family's happy reunion.
     Unfortunately, there is a third possibility.  I said that Simone
might be *welcoming* Vito.  Well, *where is Simone*?!
     The vision is presented, cinematically, *as a vision*.  Carlei
does everything but hang out a neon sign saying, "Hey!  This is a
vision!  See?!"  As such, the scene is inherently ambiguous.
     And Carlei has piled ambiguity on top of ambiguity in those last
few minutes.  In the vision of the families reunited, Vito looks for a
smear of blood on his father's shoe--blood he saw before his father was
killed, and which he could later conclude was from a murder.  It's no
longer there.  Well, how is blood washed out--except by blood?
     At the end, after we see Vito in the chair, the last thing before
the credits is a fragment of a poem:
     Do I need to point out that, at least in the imagery of the
English language, something like "to sleep in your tiny bed" is
frequently read as implying death?
     And finally, what were Simone's last words in the vision?  "Sea of
Tranquility."  Interestingly, at the end of the credits, those words
are repeated--by *Vito*.  Again, where is Simone?
     By misreading--by denying--the ambiguity presented on the screen,
by taking what is shown to be a vision as if it were a fact, the "Sight
and Sound" synopsis and review certainly give us a tidier, happier
story.  Maybe it is even one that *I*, personally, *want* to be the
case.  I can ignore the more somber possibilities it might open up in
the future, and focus on the redemption achieved by love and
rectitude.
     But the screen does not give me that ending as certain.  If you
want to do an "economics of interpretation," arguably, the return to
the children's home is a good middle ground.
     But what is shown on *screen* also permits a darker, sadder
ending--one that squares tragically with the whole theme of honor and a
growing connection between Simone and Vito.  Vito can *not* annul his
family's crime.  In such a darker reading, the deed, once done, can
never be undone: it can only be recompensed in blood.
     Vito has sustained a serious bullet wound.  We can assume he's
alive as he's taken away.  That's *all* we can assume.  We simply are
not shown that he indeed survives.  That he is shown last in a *vision*
is not, traditionally, very encouraging.
     I will go even further.  Note that I'm talking about what appears
on screen.  For all I know, the "Sight and Sound" review may have been
completely correct about Carlei's intentions.  Carlei and Rosella may
very well have wanted us to believe that it is absolutely undeniable
that Vito was adopted by Simone's parents.
     I don't care.  That's *not* what they put on *screen*.  On screen,
we have a vision, not a report.  On screen, we have ambiguity and
conflicting signals.  Between the director/screenwriter and the
*screen*, I will believe the screen.  And certainly between a reviewer
and the screen, I will believe the screen.  And, here, the screen is
ambiguous in what it tells us.
     Why, you ask, do I rant on about what is, in any event, one
possible interpretation of the ending?
     One reason is that it shows the effects of a perfectly honest
failure to notice things on screen in the last a few minutes of a
film.  The whole film is changed.  Aspden's denunciation is expressed
almost totally in terms of the ending.  (And, again, I don't blame
Carlei.  It was clear that the last scene was a vision--not to mention
all the other ambiguous elements.)
     Second, it shows the distinction between what we see on screen and
how we interpret it.  Once the screen announces that something it is a
"vision," for instance, the game of interpretation becomes noticeably
more complex.
     The third reason is that we frequently fail to see the moral and
the "metaphysical" when they are presented to us as things people
actually live.  The modern mind wants to have little speeches to warn
us that an act is ethical.  Ethics, morality, honor, duty--these are
things we regard as "political" or "policy" decisions.  They are
somehow divorced from the things we do every day.  That they could be
*lived*, that they could govern every decision, and be reflected in
every action--well, we don't seem to swallow that too easily.  We don't
recognize it even when someone rubs our noses in it.
     The theme of honor is one of the most traditional in literature.
It is also one of the grimmest.  That alone should warn us against too
quickly assuming there will be a happy ending--even for a genuine hero
like Vito.
     Having said that we should not assume the best, I should also say
that neither should we assume the worst.  Sometimes, in films as well
as in life, we just don't know.  Then, we must rely on hope.

Title
Review for Bröderna Lejonhjärta (1977)
Screenplay: Astrid Lindgren
Director: Olle Helbom
Music: Bjorn Isfalt, Lasse Dahlberg
Copyright 1977, AB Svensk Filmindustri
Dubbed, video version, Almi TV Production, Pacific Arts Video.
Running time in the 1992 Suncoast video catalog is listed at 120
     minutes.  The version I rented (also Pacific Arts) was at
     least 10 minutes shorter.
     THE BROTHERS LIONHEART is a moving, exciting--and
entrancing--Swedish film for children.  It's about the adventures of
two brothers--one no more than ten, the other no more than twenty--as
they fight tyranny and evil in another world.
     At points, its production values may lessen the impact for some.
Its cinematic approach may weaken its impact for others.  Some parents,
however, may be wary that it will have too *great* an impact on some
kids--which might have happened in the case of at least one alleged
grown-up.  (You'll have to read the spoiler at the end to fully see
what I mean, though.)
     Warning: Ultimately, this film can be accused of being--dare I say
it?--*sweet*.  Watching it, some of you would spend a fair amount of
time writhing on the floor, gagging.
Note on purchasing:  The Suncoast catalog listed this at $14.95, but the
local store told me today that it had been dropped.  I'm going to have to
hope they find a copy in the warehouse or try to track down the
distributor.
     Astrid Lindgren is the author of the Pippi Longstocking tales,
about a "magical miss," pig-tailed and freckle-faced.  Well, after
seeing THE BROTHERS LIONHEART, for which Lindgren wrote the
screenplay, I have begun to wonder whether the Pippi Longstocking tales
are quite the simple stories of pluck and independence I have heard
about.
     However, the box cover says that this is from a book by her that
is quite different from the Pippi tales.  (I'm going to have to get
hold of the book.)
     The blurb on the cover makes it seem that this will be a nice
straightforward fantasy adventure for kids.
     (Don't look for it in Scheuer or Maltin's descriptions of films.
It seems to be video-only in the U.S.)
     The story begins in a Swedish city some time, judging from the one
automobile shown, in the 19-teens.  That we're in for something a bit
different from the blurb is indicated in the first minutes of the
film.  In voiceover, Karl (nicknamed "Crispy") Lion (Lejon) introduces
himself and his brother Jonathan (Jonatan), and tells us that "It was
the day I learned I had to die soon."
     (Assuming that "Skorpan" is the Swedish for the English "Crispy,"
then Crispy is played by Lars Soderdahl.  Staffan Gotestam plays
Jonathan.  [Umlaut above the "o" in each name.])
     Karl is the younger brother and something is killing him, leaving
him coughing all the time.  We're never told what it is, but not much
more than five minutes after telling that he has to die, Crispy will
report *Jonathan's* death.  When their house catches fire, he's killed
jumping from the upper floor saving Crispy.
     Crispy's hope is that Jonathan told him truly about "Nangeola."
(Someone more familiar with Swedish myth may wish to correct my
spelling of Nangeola.  I'm flying on pronunciation alone--it's a hard
"g", could be a "k".)
     Less than ten minutes from the beginning, the film turns from
sepia-tone to color, and Crispy awakens in Nangeola--how long after
Jonathan's death, we don't know.
     This is all done speedily, straightforwardly, and economically.
The lives and deaths of Jonathan and Karl are just a prelude.  But for
American audiences, this isn't the usual way to get the heroes from the
mundane world to their adventure.
     And Nangeola is *not* heaven.  Jonathan and Crispy have landed in
Cherry Valley; and yes, it does seem like a pre-Christian description
of the afterlife.  It's a medieval-looking world, sunny and beautiful.
Crispy's healthy and fit now.  He can swim, and he knows how to ride
horses.
     But across the hills is Wild Rose Valley, and it is under the rule
of Tengil, "from the land of ancient mountains," and his black
knights.  (I've lost the name of the actor playing Tengil, but he looks
strangely like Buster Keaton--but devoid of all humor or lightness,
never speaking aloud.)
     Jonathan will be something of an underground leader, trying to
rescue Orva, Wild Rose Valley's leader.  Crispy will follow Jonathan,
and there will be bloodshed and that monster.
     Well, if that's a quick sketch of what's in store, how do we
evaluate THE BROTHERS LIONHEART?
     To begin, let's take those things that I think will weaken its
impact for some audiences.  First, the production values, the
technology.
     The filmmakers make extensive of real settings, so the only real
glitch is the monster.  High-tech, this isn't.  Early GODZILLA is
more like it.  But they don't overdo the monster, and it's not too much
to ask that we slightly suspend our demand for technological
perfection.
     (A trivial note is that I found Jonathan's thick head of hair to
seem like a wig.  But I had the same response to a kid at college.
Some hair styles just don't seem real to me.)
     Perhaps more distancing will be the cinematic approach itself.
This is *Swedish*, after all.  Take the popular image of a film by
Ingmar Bergman; pretend that he decided to do an exciting, upbeat film
for kids.  Well, there'll be a certain *ambiguity* there, won't there?
     Scenes of people at a great distance, with their voices floating
to us out of nowhere--even if we like the inheritance from silents,
it's not what we expect from a kids' flick.
     (Parenthetically, it makes dubbing a lot more natural.  On the big
screen, I prefer subtitles, so I can hear the real voices.  If the
picture holds me, I quickly combine the two.  On the small screen, and
for kids, I suspect dubbing is lot more practical.  I noticed it only a
few times.  The speakers deliver things in a lovely Swedish accent,
learned apparently from teachers speaking clipped British English.
Unfortunately, I didn't see any credits.)
     On its own merits, however, the unexpected approach is one of the
virtues of THE BROTHERS LIONHEART.  It does not so much tell a
story--although it does that, and well--as it weaves an image, a feel.
If we're willing simply to sit back and let it work, it will carry us
along.
     The music works in much the same way.  It sounds like a hurdy
gurdy, a street organ (popular in the 'teens), with some electronic
accompaniment.  (If that sound isn't familiar, an old squeeze-box is
not too unlike it.) The theme is short, modified and repeated over and
over again--not somber, not jolly, sort of minimalist, lending to more
than one feel.  It hovers in the background sometimes, then swells over
the scenes where there's no dialogue and we see things at a distance.
     The characterizations fit in with the sense of "feel."  We see
little recognizable "magic" in Nangeola.  People behave the way people
behave, and they have to trudge through to reach their goals.  Crispy
does not become a magical hero-child.  I certainly have no objection to
the magical hero-child, that's not what this film is about.  Crispy
does what is reasonable for a nine-year-old.  He's fit and healthy, but
he's still Crispy.
     Soderdahl brings it off well.  He has a kiddish sort of frown that
seems to tell of both perplexity and a certain stubborness: things are
obviously beyond him, but he's called upon to play his part and he
will.  I don't know how much to credit the dubbing, and I don't know
how Soderdahl would do in other roles, but here he seems perfectly
fitted to the character he's playing.
     Gotestam, as his brother, has a harder acting task.  He plays a
real, but rather stainless hero.  I found him most effective in the
scenes where he was close to his brother.  At times, the hero role was
just a bit too "written" rather than "spoken."  More than once I
wondered if this was replaying some myth, which Swedish audiences would
find familiar.  (Contrariwise, the references to the Wild Rose Valley
people's conducting a "resistance" effort sounded too modern.  Both
points may owe something to Lindgren's original book.)
     Neither actor, by the way, is quite the model that an American
film company might choose.  Attractive and appealing, but more like
Central Casting had to get two kids out of a real neighborhood, rather
than having all of New York or L.A.'s acting community at its
disposal.
     So far, I think any objections to the film are really objections
to cinematic considerations.  You want a high-tech monster, you ain't
gonna get it.  You don't like the basic way of doing things, you're
gonna have problems with the flick.
     But many kids are perfectly able to slip into and out of the
reverie that is perhaps a necessary part of watching a film like this.
They're probably more flexible in their demands.
     But since this is billed as a *kids'* flick, I start thinking of
*parents*.  What about the values that the film assumes or encourages?
What *does* the film encourage?
     Looking at the action, there is little to criticize: The
characters are moved by loyalty, generosity, love of freedom, love of
kin and country.
     Jonathan explains that he must go to Wild Rose Valley to try to
rescue Orva; Crispy doesn't want him to go.  Jonathan has to; he is
second in command to the woman who leads the resistance.  She's known
by everyone:
     That's a theme Crispy will repeat again and again: "I won't be a
little *weed*."  Certainly an idea many would find laudable.
     But, being somewhat paranoid about what some American parents are
worried about, I should note a "sensational" aspect: There's a *nude
scene*!
     (Those of you who have seen the movie will *please* not guffaw
*too* loudly.)
     The hyper among us may regard this scene as symptomatic of
"Swedish looseness."  Just after Crispy arrives in Nangeola, he and
Jonathan fall into the water.  Then we have a short scene as they're
sitting by the pond bank fishing, their clothes drying on a tree.  It's
all at a distance and no strategic geography is visible to answer any
questions of kid sisters who have not yet been educated on such
details.  Nonetheless, I note it for the record.
     I found the scene quite touching--as I found practically all of
the interaction between Crispy and Jonathan.  My own experience in
communicating with a ten-years-distant sibling was rather less
successful!
     The thing I'm strangely afraid of is that in the United States
some conservative parents may focus too much on something like
skinny-dipping.
     (I recall that THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST drew fire from
certain quarters because the film pictured Christ as having been
*tempted* by the prospect of sex with Mary Magdalene--even though
*rejecting* the temptation.  Those same folks seemed not to object that
it pictured Christ as actually *committing* sin in non-sexual cases.)
     Indeed, I worry that some parents might at least *think* about
partial nudity (even to approve of it) while missing something else
more subtle going on here--something about which I myself am
ambiguous.
     From a Christian (or Jewish, or Moslem) perspective, there has to
be a certain hesitation about a film that posits a pagan view of the
afterlife.  And even a New Ager might be uneasy about encouraging too
"easy" an attitude towards death.
     That the film is quietly entrancing may be a virtue for viewing as
an adult.  It may be quite otherwise when you're thinking about your
kids watching it.
     As a kid, I saturated myself in science fiction and fantasy.  But
I can't recall anything that simply wove so sure a web around me that
was posited on *death* as the gate to the world of adventure.
     Also, I come from a place where the idea of a kid's being "a
dreamer" carries with it the idea that he won't live past twenty.  If I
had a kid, and he was "a dreamer," I'd bloody well prep him on this
film before I plugged it into the VCR.  That may be Irish-American
superstition.  Tough, I'd talk about the film first.
     So, to the extent I have doubts about THE BROTHERS LIONHEART, I
think they reflect the *effectiveness* of the film.  It can entrance
those of who will let it do its work.  It's touching in places,
exciting in others, and has a clear "reality" throughout.
     Beyond that, and to look into my doubts a bit more, I have to get
into the spoilers that follow (and which include a spoiler on the film
RADIO FLYER).
     Above, I said that death is the gate to Nangeola.  Not totally
comfy on its own.
     (It might be less non-comfy if I knew Swedish mythology.)
     But the end of the film makes the point even stronger.  The battle
against Tengil is won, Jonathan gets hold of the horn that controls the
monster--the dragon Katla.  He follows her back to her lair, and she
is killed.  But she's scorched him, and now he can't move his legs.
Soon he won't be able to move at all.
     His only hope, he tells Crispy, is to get to Nangolema--the world
beyond Nangeola.  Their horses are there, it is only their outer bodies
that now lie outside the dragon's lair.  So is Mattias, their sort of
adopted grandfather, who was killed in Wild Rose Valley.
     *We*, however, do *not* see Nangolema.  Instead, we see just the
fire light, and beginning to shine through it, a sculpture of two doves
flying; as the camera pulls back, we see it's on a grave stone.  And a
voice we've never heard before reads the inscription.
     Good Lord!  What are we seeing?  Are we seeing merely what we
would see in Sweden?  Are we being told that while they have gone from
us here, that "another day" has already dawned in Nangolema?
     Or is there no Nangolema?  Shall they die *now*?  Is Jonathan
effectively asking Crispy to commit suicide?
     Or is there no Nangolema because there is no *Nangeola*?  Is the
grave all that is real?  Has the whole story been Crispy's last dream
before dying?
     As the step to Nangolema, the ending is logical and triumphant.
     As an open end--where we don't know for sure that Nangolema is
there, but it might well be, the ending is essentially wistful.  As an
unwitting plea for suicide, it becomes incomprehensible.
     As Crispy's last dream, it becomes heart-wrenching.  He has had
his day in the sun, even if only imaginary.  Only by finally facing
death, and somehow accepting the doubtfulness of it all, is he ready to
die.  It is an eerie counterpoint to the triumphant ending.
     Some might say that a comparable ending appeared in RADIO FLYER.
It shows the younger hero racing a home-made contraption down a steep
hill, soaring off a shed roof that acts like a ski-jump, and actually
*flying* his machine--escaping from an abusive situation.  Some have
said that this is merely a metaphor or a cover for his dying in the
attempt.
     I am one of those who says that he actually flew his contraption
because that's what *appeared on the screen*.  He escaped.  He was
free--not dead.  I can point to *the screen* to back that up.  And in a
film, that's where we've got to look.
     Ultimately, the screen is silent.  If I wish, the screen can
merely repeat what I have been told about events in that Swedish city
in the 19-teens.  But Jonathan had told me that Nangolema, like
Nangeola, is there; Crispy has told me so also.  If I wish to believe
them, I can do so.
     So also, if I wish to render the whole film a dream before death,
I can do so.  The gravestone is there.
