Authors
Craig P Steffen
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mask, The (1994)
     When going to see this movie, I was honestly expecting some bad
brain candy at the very best, judging by ACE VENTURA.  The feeling I
had after leaving the theater was "Wow, that was really good!"
     Jim Carrey stars in this quasi-thirties-super-hero story where the
jokes are almost all actually funny, rather that so disgusting as to
make the audience titter a bit.  Stanley Lipkiss, Carrey's character, is
very much the mild-mannered, Clark-Kent image as a bank clerk.  After
donning the Mask one night, however, it's powers allow him to become
what he sees himself as in his fantasies.  Snappy cinematography and
superbly blended computer animation make his alter ego someone with the
powers of Beetlejuice and the wardrobe sense of BATMAN's Joker.
Between Carrey and his two love interests, there is enough real acting
(surprisingly enough) to add a bit of human touch so we don't feel like
we're watching a cartoon.  Lastly, in his forays as the pastel
crusader, Carrey will keep all movie buffs in the audience hopping with
his rapid-fire quotes from all over the spectrum, both old and new.
There is just a dash of the classical cheesy musical, which the loudly
costumed mask is able to play to a tea.
     Carrey delivers a performance that will surprise those who have
seem him on TV or in other movies.  Lipkiss appeals to everyone in the
audience who has ever not quite fit in with their peers.  The two
leading ladies' [don't know actor's names] performances add some
humanity to the story, but otherwise aren't that impressive.  The
villains are just that, the scum of the earth, very one-dimensional,
and good a being so.  The only other performance worth expounding on is
Lipkiss's dog; he gives a performance that would leave Lassie in the
dust, and furthermore, takes you completely by surprise several times.
     A good movie to see once for fun in the theaters, it's selling
power will be for video.
