Authors
Evan Hunt
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Strictly Ballroom (1992)
     If you're the kind of person who sighs wistfully at the end of
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN because they don't make movies like that anymore,
rejoice--because they have!  STRICTLY BALLROOM is a marvel of a movie,
a parody of every musical cliche that amazingly also rejuvenates the
genre and makes it fresh and alive again.  It is at once sweetly
romantic and hilariously funny and somehow makes a film about ballroom
dancing which uses old pop songs the most original film musical since
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
     The story of STRICTLY BALLROOM uses elements from every musical
ever made, and uses them perfectly.  Scott, a young dancer, loses his
partner when he breaks the regulations and starts dancing unauthorized
steps. Fran, a frumpy beginner at his mothers dance school (marvelously
played by Tara Morice), persuades him to follow his dream, with her as
his partner.  As they learn to dance together, they fall in love--but
will Scott be able to stand against the pressure to go back to his old
partner and dance to win?
     What makes STRICTLY BALLROOM work so well is the utter conviction
of the players.  Although the extravagant parody is hilarious, the
characters are utterly sincere, making you feel for them even as you
laugh.  The classic falling-in-love-through-dance scenes are
blissful--the dancers simply glow with romance.
     STRICTLY BALLROOM is the kind of movie that sends you out of the
theatre dancing and singing, with an insane smile on your face.  If
there was an Oscar for "movie that makes you feel real good", this
would win.
