Authors
pcb@unicomp.net
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     To put it succinctly, this movie was a piece of utter trash.  If
you did or did not read the book, you will certainly find it utterly
disappointing.  The plot is extremely *weak*, and the whole main idea
from the book was *completely* changed.  The book was about finding
special diamonds for use in the super-computer industry, which would
set the finder five years ahead of the competition, while the movie
seemed to concern itself with finding the diamonds for use with some
dumb laser, a totally *stupid* idea, and also with the bonds of
father-son love, which has been totally overdone.  They really might
have had something if they had stuck with the book.
     Another MAJOR black eye for this movie was its so called "special
effects."  The gorillas (especially amy) looked more like dogs than
Gorillas, or maybe just people in suits.  Also, some genius over at the
production company thought it would be cool if this gorilla could talk
using virtual reality gloves which interpret sign language into a voice
(a really dumb one, I might add).  This really became unbelievably
stupid when amy began speaking to the other gorillas, and they seemed
to understand her.
     Some idiot also decided that the gorillas would be better if they
just beat up their victims rather than smashing their heads in with a
couple of stone bats.  Now, that would have made the movie *almost*
worth watching if there was some good blood and gore.  Another fault in
the movie was the ease with which the characters found the city of
Zinj.  It seemed that they just bumped into it, while in the book
*major* research was done to find where the probable location of the
city would be.  This made the book more believable, and the movie
totally unbelievable!
     Finally, seeing CONGO was probably the low point of last week.
Conclusion:  Save yourself six bucks on this one, and don't go see it.
