Authors
Rob Falk
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1992)
     If you were expecting a horror movie full of scares, blood, and
guts, don't see this movie.
     If you were expecting a movie of any depth and meaning, don't see
this movie.
     If you are looking to be mindlessly entertained with stupid wanabee
valley-girls, vampire butt-kicking, and watching a total babe doing
interesting gymnastics routines, see this movie.
     This is not a movie that will go down in the books as a great
contribution to mankind or anything, but for an afternoon movie with
nothing else to do, it is OK.
     The pseudo-big names in the movie are Donald Sutherland as Merrick,
the trainer of the killer bimbo, Paul Rubens of Pee-Wee fame (hey,
kiddies, look at what I can do!  He he!) playing the major antagonist's
right hand man :-), Luke Perry of 90210 as Pike, the Rebel Without a
Clue (pre-teen girls all over the country are sighing now), and Rutger
Hauer playing Lothos the major vampire baddie.  
     The basic plot is that all throughout history, there have been
women who were destined to fight and destroy vampires.  Buffy (what a
name!) is this time's chosen champion.  Merrick finds the young
cheerleader and convinces her that she is the Chosen and must fulfill
her destiny.  After much whining and complaining, and the death of
Merrick, Buff decides that she must go out and fight.  Buffy must also
deal with her shallow friends as she develops a thing for Pike (The
thing from another tax bracket).  When I mean shallow, I mean that I
have stepped in deeper puddles, one of their friends gets muched by a
vamp, and all they are worried about is the yellow leather jacket they
had lent the victim.
     The effects were decent, even though the flying the vampires did
was kind of lame.  The action and fight choreography is very well
done IMHO, and the plot and screenplay were decent.  I give it a B- for
entertainment value alone.
