Authors
Bryant Frazer
Number of Reviews
62

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     Give Warner Brothers credit.  With Joel Schumacher in charge of
BATMAN FOREVER, the company has finally made its biggest asset truly
safe for mass consumption.
     Yes, yes, everybody knows that Tim Burton is brilliant and all,
but wasn't BATMAN RETURNS just a little on the weird side?  Weren't the
movies a little too bleak for wholesome entertainment?  And hasn't it
become common wisdom that those first two Batman adventures were long
on style and short on *story*?
     Well, maybe.  While Tim Burton has built a cult reputation on the
strength of his idiosyncratic filmmaking, it seemed a little odd that
this would be the fellow chosen to finesse a blockbuster out of the
Batman franchise.  Studio execs must have been overly charmed by his
colorful production of BEETLEJUICE, and no doubt pawed eagerly through
copies of Frank Miller comics when Burton suggested a "darker" version
of Batman.  Michael Keaton and Jack Nicholson signed on, guaranteeing a
big fat hit.  When sequel time rolled around, Burton's vision became
even more surreal, riddled with non sequiturs and fetishistic visuals
that raked in less dough even as, one suspects, it alienated a good
portion of its audience.
     Mind you, Batman put me to sleep.  Twice.  The second movie was a
marked improvement, mainly because it so eloquently demonstrated that
Burton was a man who loved and understood cinema, even if he couldn't
quite get it to do what he wanted it to.  But I'd love it if someone
could explain to me exactly why the guy who directed THE CLIENT,
FALLING DOWN, and FLATLINERS was tapped to take over a wild, surreal
series of action movies.
     "Biff, pow," Batman.  Schumacher directs the whole thing up
close, like he's doing some kind of TV movie.  When individual body
parts are filling the screen, and the cuts are so quick that one motion
is indistinguishable from another and nearly every shot has been
spliced into the next before we can even focus, I suppose we're
supposed to rub our eyes and just say 'gosh.' I wouldn't be surprised
if this plays better on video, but that's not really the point.
     It's not all bad.  The story, for instance is actually an
improvement on the original films.  From the first introductory
sequence, the movie moves like a greased pig.  We get to see Robin,
whose character is woven into Batman's life.  At last, something more
than lip service is paid to the twisted psychology of Batman, and it
actually affects how the movie turns out.  And who would have expected
Nicole Kidman as Chase Meridian to do anything besides stand around and
drip sex?  More than just window dressing, the love interest catalyzes
Batman's examination of the two sides of himself.  In fact, this movie
goes all the way back to the beginning -- we have to see Bruce Wayne's
parents get killed again, we watch the kid fall into the bat cave, we
get the same old spiel about his obsessions.  It's a little trite, but
it keeps the far more colorful super-villains from stealing the show
completely (as they did in the Burton films) and cements our
identification with the hero, which is crucial to our enjoyment of this
one.
     Chris O'Donnell is well-cast in a role that plays against Val
Kilmer's too-cool crusader.  Maybe the reason we never saw much of what
made Michael Keaton's character tick was that he had no one besides
blank wall Kim Basinger to explain himself to.  Kilmer is better at
playing the part, even if he hardly seems old enough to be any kind of
mentor to O'Donnell.  And if Jim Carrey's histrionics are welcome
anywhere, they're welcome here.  For the first time, a comic book
character has been translated absolutely intact to the silver screen.
     The visual design is hit and miss.  The costumes are terrific,
and the retooled Batmobile is still very much the Batmobile.  But the
new Gotham City is less a locale for the movie than it is simply a
backdrop for the proceedings.  And the special effects, on the whole,
have the unfortunate effect of defusing some of the more spectacular
sequences by reminding us that we're simply watching some well-executed
but obviously computer-generated special effects.  And while the sound
is excellent, the orchestral score (ersatz Elfman) is not.
     But there's nothing sublime or even subtle about any of this.
No surprises, no mysteries, no moments out of time that fill us with
awe or wonder.  The best that can be said is that the movie does what
it sets out to do very well.  In contrast, Burton's reach seems always
to exceed his grasp (the notable exception is his most perfect movie,
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  When Burton was directing the films, you knew
that the pictures on-screen were the stuff of legend, even if the sum of
the parts was actually greater than the whole.  But with Schumacher at
the helm, the adventurousness of the filmmaking itself has
disappeared.  It's hard to pinpoint what's missing, but Batman has
suddenly become completely safe, a cuddly part of the corporate
culture.  He may be packing them in at the multiplex like no one else,
but when I start checking the Gotham City skyline for McDonald's arches
(you've seen the commercials, haven't you?), I know the magic is gone.

Title
Review for Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc, The (1999)
       Don't get me wrong -- I tend to appreciate Besson's naive,
       unashamedly romantic worldview, an artsy European sensibility
       gone thoroughly Hollywood. His 1994 Leon is exciting and
       absurdly moving, thanks mainly to the interplay between Jean
       Reno and a young Natalie Portman, and 1997's The Fifth
       Element is a goofy paean to love, L-U-V, that's even more of
       a hoot on repeated viewings. But his Joan of Arc is a mess,
       despite some stirring battle scenes and the mostly knockout
       presence of a close-cropped Milla Jovovich as the maiden
       herself.
       Jovovich, Besson's own personal muse through the making of
       his last two films (though they've since separated), is
       magnetic and energetic enough to play a credible Joan (as
       long as you believe Joan was not just a warrior, but also a
       fabulous, supermodel-level babe). And Besson remains a
       servicable action film director, though not an especially
       facile one. Leading her army against the seemingly
       impenetrable fortresses of the English, Joan's struggle
       against great odds is undeniably stirring, and Besson helps
       you understand how the French could believe, fervently, that
       God is on her side.
       Besson's big mistake, I think, is trying to dramatize the
       interior life of his subject. Yes, Joan had visions -- but I
       guarantee that whatever image a sympathetic audience conjures
       in its collective mind will be more compelling than the
       blue-eyed Christ figure on display in Besson's hallucinatory
       dream sequences. The whole conceit turns into a disaster
       right about the time Dustin Hoffman (billed as "The
       Conscience") shows up, spouting platitudes and sending poor
       Milla running around her cell, babbling like Ally McBeal.
       That's kind of a shame, since she does quite well up to that
       point, charging into battle with a banshee wail that suggests
       the eruption of a sublimated bloodthirstiness. That darkly
       attractive aspect of her character -- that she's as likely a
       charismatic madwoman as the vessel of the lord -- is more or
       less betrayed by the final reels, in which The Conscience
       browbeats her over the killing she's overseen and Joan starts
       to look like little more than a very confused young lady
       who's about to take a fall.
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 2.35:1
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
Directed by Krzysztof Kieslowski
Written by Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz
     They don't make movies like this anymore.  Even the most
self-conscious of European films, destined to be widely promoted in
America with dull trailers, tasteful posters, and an art house blitz,
aren't as unapologetically indulgent as the recent films of Polish
director Krzysztof Kieslowski.  His DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE offers an
oblique meditation on the properties of light alongside a metaphysical
study of Veronique, a French woman who inadvertently photographs her
perfect double (Weronika) while visiting Poland.  BLUE casts art-house
standby Juliette Binoche (THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, DAMAGE) as
a mopey French widow, and features a rich and overwhelming orchestral
score and arresting imagery (a sugar cube touched to coffee fills the
movie screen as the white crystals turn brown) that literally bring the
film to a halt time and again.  WHITE is a neatly comic film about
marriage and capitalism that travels from France back to Poland and
offers up at least one show-stopping visual metaphor--the screen blazes
white in illustration of Julie Delpy's orgasm, reducing audiences to
gasps and titters.
     Kieslowski's harshest critics maintain that the films sap the
sympathies of an irredeemably gullible audience.  They accuse him of
arranging for fashionable Frenchwomen to traipse through his very
European landscapes, murmuring New Age platitudes, sleeping with
sensitive New Age guys, and pouting for the camera.  The director's
newest film, RED, the culmination of his Three Colors trilogy which
also includes BLUE and WHITE, they insist, is overblown claptrap,
substituting notions of Fate and Destiny for credible filmmaking.  The
new issue of FILM COMMENT juxtaposes a rich essay on the trilogy by
NEW YORK DAILY NEWS critic Dave Kehr with a tirade against it (by
Phillip Lopate) which insists that the film's supporters have been
aesthetically "bamboozled."
     Kieslowski's audience is neither gullible nor easily amused.  The
concluding scenes of RED, which may represent the conclusion of the
director's career, tie the three films of the trilogy together so
perfectly and unexpectedly that their themes resonate in a viewer's
head for days afterward.  The films ostensibly examine the principles
of liberty, equality, and fraternity, but they do so in the service of
a much broader agenda.  Kieslowski has integrated three very distinct
pieces into a triptych that folds in on itself and contemplates its own
nature.  In the process, his characters determine one another's
destinies, even as the director plays God.
     Irene Jacob, the uncannily radiant star of VERONIQUE, is
Valentine, a Swiss model who we see shooting an advertisement for (of
all things) chewing gum.  In the film's most memorable visual trope,
her face is to be reproduced on a huge banner and draped against the
side of a building in Geneva.  Accidents and mishaps drive much of the
action in Kieslowski's films, and the most important relationship here
is catalyzed when Valentine, trying to tune in a distant radio station
on her car stereo, hits a dog in the street.  The dog, named Rita, is
bleeding, but alive, and Valentine tries to take it back to its home.
Valentine finds Rita's owner, the retired judge Joseph Kern (the
perfectly crusty Jean-Louis Trintignant), who hardly seems to care
whether the dog lives or dies.  Kern leads a solitary life, but has a
radio set up so that he can monitor the telephone conversations of his
neighbors.  Valentine initially finds his aural voyeurism repugnant,
but a strange bond grows between the two characters as they relate
their life stories to one another.
     The film contains a great many telephone conversations, and indeed
Kieslowski investigates the ways in which we humans communicate (or
fail to communicate) with one another.  It's telling that the
relationship between Valentine and Kern (they could be lovers if not
for their age difference) is the only one in which two people seem to
be gaining knowledge and support from one another (Valentine has a
boyfriend, Michel, who is in England and who she plans to visit, but
throughout RED she only communicates with him by telephone).  It
would be unfair to give away further details, since much of the film is
wrapped up in the intricate relationships that color the lives of both
Valentine and Kern, and an odd sort of "double life" that Kern himself
is living.  The film, and the trilogy, culminate in an act of God which
hinges on the intrusion of the director himself, who decides the final
fate of his characters.
     Although Kieslowski obviously finds something fascinating in the
face of Irene Jacob (which is honestly the glue holding this film
together), one is tempted to draw the conclusion that it's
Trintignant's misanthropic old judge--who conspires to manipulate his
own cast of characters--that the director feels the closest affinity
with.  It's a very good sign, then, that the embittered judge finds
some measure of satisfaction and redemption at the end of _Red_ (which,
incidentally, Kieslowski claims is his last film).  Kern has a pointed
conversation with Jacob at one point, asking her why she stopped to
pick up the dog and take it to a doctor.  Was it to help the dog, he
wants to know, or was it to make herself feel better, less guilty? By
the end of the film, the judge will be asking himself the same question
about his own contrivance, one that is key for Kieslowski, who has said
in interviews that he has come to believe people are inherently
selfish.*  Critics have complained that Kieslowski's films are reliant
on coincidence and overblown ideas about Destiny, but it's a moot
complaint when the director is so honest about his role as grand
manipulator of his own world, weaving his presence thematically into
the work.  The culmination of his masterful Three Colors trilogy
suggests there is Something Larger than Kieslowski's characters.
Whether that is the Deity or simply the Director is left for us to
decide.
* See the discussion of RED in Danusia Stok's excellent collection of 
interviews, KIESLOWSKI ON KIESLOWSKI, published in the US by Faber & 
Faber.  ISBN: 0-571-16733-0.

Title
Review for Tank Girl (1995)
     How disappointed can we be, really, that TANK GIRL doesn't live up
to the promise of its comic book origins?
     TANK GIRL the comic strip is a true brainstorm, a patchwork of
edgy drawings that combine and create a montage that belies the
scattershot narrative surface.  The British export creates its own
metasatirical planet, all the better to backlight the herky-jerky
antics of Our Hero, a cute, punkish loudmouth genuinely unlike any
other.  If you're a comics reader, imagine the doom-saying of a Frank
Miller opus getting wanked off by the low-level hijinks that give the
X-Men their wacky charm.  Mix in a whole lot of sexual innuendo, SF
style, and you're distilling eau d'Tank Girl.
     TANK GIRL the movie falls short on all those counts except the
wacky charm (Lori Petty exudes great sparkling dollops of wacky charm,
much to her credit).  At the beginning of the movie, we find the earth
has been all but completely dehydrated by a near-miss with a nasty
comet.  The overwhelming majority of the world's water is controlled by
the megacorporate Water & Power, with what's left over coveted by
mutant renegades and bootleggers.  Tank Girl's boyfriend (surrogate
husband) is killed and she and a child (surrogate daughter) are
captured in a raid on one of those bootleg compounds.  She breaks free
of Water & Power's clutches when they try to send her on a suicide
mission into mutant territory, but returns (with the help of fellow
ex-con Jet Girl) to rescue the kid.
     While director Rachel Talalay (previously responsible for the game
but forgettable FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE and GHOST IN THE
MACHINE) has a good eye for fun performances, she's not quite up to the
action drill (the stops-out MGM-style production of "Let's Do It" is
more like it).  Meanwhile, there's no sense of the low-tech grit that
permeates the original stories--this one's got lots of gloss and
sheen, even if the budget ain't exactly WATERWORLDesque.  While the
comic book is very good (not great), the movie is only middling.  What
went wrong?  Tank Girl got prettified by Hollywood (can't you just
imagine her disgust at that idea?).
     Gone is any sense of the character as vagabond--by foisting a
family off on the poor girl from the very beginning, the movie gives us
a lame justification for her motherly wanderlust.  By characterizing
the bad-ass "rippers" (kangaroo mutants ably crafted for the screen by
FX master Stan Winston) as a bunch of likable goofs, we're given
obligatory comic relief as well as a sense of injustice at their
plight.  And while Malcolm McDowell's evil tormentor is a perfect foil
for Tank Girl (straight outta central casting!), in the end there are a
few too many formulas and too few surprises.
     But what did you expect?  One reason comic books still enjoy a
reputation as an "underground" art form is that you can still find
books, like TANK GIRL, that fly in the face, surprise, and delight.
Tank Girl's brash immodesty and vulgar predilections couldn't be
translated intact to a studio film and, indeed, the character we see on
screen is but a shadow of the vibrant comic book creation.  Someone, of
course, is to be commended for giving a green light to the project in
the first place.  Certainly nothing else at the multiplex looks or
sounds quite like TANK GIRL.  It's a minor stroke to cast Ice-T as a
ripper, indistinguishable yet unmistakable underneath his makeup.  And
Hollywood isn't usually wise enough to hire someone like Courtney Love
(Cobain) to oversee a rock soundtrack.  This one features jewels like
Devo's "Girl U Want" and Joan Jett and Paul Westerberg duetting on
"Let's Do It."
     Comic book frames are cut into the film while the soundtrack
throbs underneath to give TANK GIRL the rough-and-tumble momentum that
propelled the original stories.  In this way, the film reinforces its
own second-class status.  Artist Jamie Hewlett, after all, didn't have
someone else's work to rely on to fill the gaps in his own readers'
experience.  And while a rock and roll soundtrack may have enhanced
your own reading experience, the comic book proved on its own that it
had music in its soul.

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)
       Like his countryman David Cronenberg, Egoyan is one of the
       few great directors working today whose films reflect not
       only a consistent worldview, but also a numinous mood. (Also
       like Cronenberg, Egoyan has set one of this year's most
       memorable scenes inside of an automatic car wash.) Appealing
       no more strenuously to the intellect than to our innate sense
       for beauty, Egoyan's films look chilly but eventually
       surrender warmth. They alienate, distress and confound us.
       What's most miraculous is that they close up the wounds
       they've made.
       If some folks are won over by his rather transparent
       puppetry, it doesn't mean that Stephens is inherently evil.
       Clearly, he's a man doing his job, even if his speech seems
       far too rehearsed for there to be any sincerity left in his
       motives. And, in a positively Egoyanian turn of events, we've
       learned that Stephens is mourning over his own lost child, a
       drug-addled girl named Zoe who has grown into
       post-adolescence as one of the living dead. The film opens,
       in fact, with an idyllic image of Stephens and his wife
       sleeping with their three-year-old daughter between them,
       bathed in warm light. When we see this image for the second
       time, it is as the introduction to the second of two
       incidents that anchor the film. The first is the actual
       on-screen representation of the school bus accident. And the
       second is Stephens' mindscreen recollection of a terrifying
       morning when he found little Zoe swollen from spider bites.
       But never mind. Although THE SWEET HEREAFTER is an even more
       complex puzzle than Egoyan's previous EXOTICA, all these
       disparate elements reveal themselves in similarly good time
       to be an essential part of this multidimensional story.
       Egoyan jumps backward and forward in the narrative with a
       clever deliberacy that reveals bits and pieces of literal and
       metaphorical relationships all in their own time. It verges
       on soap opera: we learn that Wendell's wife Risa is having an
       affair with Billy the widower, whose babysitter is an
       aspiring rock star who's been lured into an unwholesome
       relationship with ... well, again, never mind. You just have
       to see it.
       And oh, is it something to see. Paul Sarossy's camerawork and
       Mychael Danna's music both belong on another plane entirely
       from this world of ours. Danna's exotic score, lending a
       tranquil quietude to the anxious proceedings, layers aural
       texture atop Sarossy's splendid Panavision cinematography
       (which will be wrecked, by the way, on videotape, so see this
       in a theater if you possibly can). The performers often
       inhabit only the very edge of this widescreen frame, their
       individualized reactions highlighted by the often shadowed
       spaces that surround them. The landscape, meanwhile, is
       repeatedly expressed as a richly detailed expanse of snowy
       ground spread beneath low clouds. Even with Sarossy on board,
       never before has an Egoyan film enjoyed a visual sensibility
       quite this keen.
       The pretty pictures provide a sweeping panorama for what is,
       barring perhaps the very different L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, the
       year's most assured ensemble of performers. Leading the way
       is Holm, whose fine performance elicits, by turns, distaste,
       anxiety, and sympathy. His narration of the incident
       involving his daughter and a pocketknife held at the ready
       generates more tension than a year's worth of Hollywood
       "thrillers." Also worthy of special note is the solid Bruce
       Greenwood, whom you may or may not recognize from EXOTICA,
       flexing his thespian muscle as gas station owner Billy Ansel,
       probably the most upstanding of all these characters and
       arguably the film's eventual moral center. And Sarah Polley,
       who had a small role as Greenwood's "babysitter" in the
       previous film, reprises that role here, and then some. (Her
       deposition in Mitchell's case, it turns out, will be key.)
       Longtime Egoyan collaborator Gabrielle Rose strikes an
       authentically daffy note as bus driver Dolores Driscoll, and
       Egoyan's wife Arsinee Khanjian (who had a memorable cameo in
       IRMA VEP) does her part as one-half of a couple whose
       "hippie" sensibilities are tested by the promise of making
       somebody pay for the loss of their adopted child.
       In the end, THE SWEET HEREAFTER rejects that particular idea
       of revenge, positing instead the notion that, shunning
       litigation, a community can care for its own (and suggesting
       that a lie, if told correctly and to the right people, can be
       a much-needed suture on a gaping wound). If that seems an odd
       tack for the impetuously modern Egoyan to take, consider that
       his films have often played out as cautionary tales dwelling
       on the effects of alienation and separation -- the
       substitution of voyeurism for sexuality, and of strained
       relations for companionship. Into this cycle, THE SWEET
       HEREAFTER fits neatly. For all the vigorous gyrations these
       characters go through in coming to terms with their loss,
       only the stubborn Stephens seems to remain an island, having
       run himself dry by the story's end.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Written and Directed by Atom Egoyan
       Based on the novel by Russell Banks
       Cinematography by Paul Sarossy
       Edited by Susan Shipton
       Starring Ian Holm, Bruce Greewood, and Sarah Polley
       Canada, 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Addiction, The (1995)
     Abel Ferrara is on the record saying that he originally thought
making a vampire movie was "a stupid idea."  Presumably, then, the idea
came from his longtime coconspirator, screenwriter Nicholas St. John.
It's a good decision, because Ferrara is arguably at his best when he's
working within a well-established mythos--taking on the BODY
SNATCHERS in his 1993 remake, for instance, or casting Christopher
Walken in the Al Pacino role, updating and revamping DePalma's SCARFACE
and Coppola's GODFATHER for his own KING OF NEW YORK (1990).
     So with THE ADDICTION, Ferrara sinks his teeth into a moral fable
that equates bloodlust with amorality and postulates that there may,
even now, be salvation for the sinner.  Shadow-slinker Anabella Sciorra
nails star Lili Taylor early on, dragging her into an appropriately
chiaroscuro corner of Greenwich Village and biting her, hard. Taylor,
who plays a philosophy grad student at New York University, acquires
the vampire's thirst for blood and starts stalking the campus, preying
on the victims who are weak enough not to tell her just once, with
feeling:  get away from me.
     The movie progresses more or less as a series of episodes
detailing Taylor's interactions with old friends, professors and other
potential victims, and even other vampires. Before long, she's adopted
the cool black-clad cigs-and-sunglasses attitude of a fashionable
junkie and starts to ruminate weirdly on the Meaning of it All.
     The NYU setting defuses a problem Ferrara movies have been
having with dialogue lately; in this movie, the characters talk like
pretentious philosophy students because that's what they are, and it
makes all the difference when Taylor seduces a sweet young thing at the
movie's midpoint by inviting her upstairs to study Feuerbach. The
movie's wildly literate bent comes to a wacky fruition during a key
scene featuring Walken in a longish cameo.  Discussing the nature of
blood addiction, and giving Taylor metaphysical tips on ways to best
deal with her habit and the attendant immortality, Walken gets animated
and lurches toward her with feeling: "Have you read NAKED LUNCH?"
     Walken's presence is welcome, even though Taylor is quite capable
of handling her part without a helping hand. Ferrara's forte lately has
been coaxing anguished performances from his stars, and the camera here
lingers on Taylor, framing her body dispassionately as it wracks and
convulses, or as she crawls across the floor in the throes of her
addiction. This isn't to say that you should expect a full-frontal
Keitelian assault, but Taylor is excellent, and she provides a
necessary dollop of humanity within Ferrara's big picture.
     Shot entirely in black-and-white, Ferrara's New York is used
here mainly for backdrop and attitude. There's no real sense of
location, but this is the kind of story you'd hardly expect to see
anywhere else. The photography is mostly rich and evocative, but
occasionally heavyhanded.  You wish, for instance, that someone would
reach up and turn on a light during Taylor and Sciorra's first
encounter. It takes a little while for THE ADDICTION to get going, and
the overly mannered dialogue may have your eyelids dropping if you're
up past bedtime.  Fortunately, when the going gets weird, it's weird
enough to make you care where Ferrara and St. John are taking you.
     THE ADDICTION culminates in two major scenes, one of them being
an over-the-top party sequence that recalls the climax of my favorite
Ferrara film, MS. 45. That first scene leads directly into the second,
which is the allegorical climax, complete with a priest and communion
wafers. It'll be no surprise to anyone who's seen BAD LIEUTENANT that
Ferrara is most concerned here with the concepts of sin and redemption,
and while the last moments of THE ADDICTION are a little obscure, he
follows through, perhaps shoring up a new reputation as one of New
York's foremost gloomy optimists.

Title
Review for Exotica (1994)
     After the final reel of EXOTICA had unspooled, like a slender key
filling the last hole in a wooden puzzlebox, a woman at the New York
Film Festival screening last year had a question for director Atom
Egoyan.  She wanted to know what happened at the end of the movie.
Visibly perturbed at the question, Egoyan dodged it.  Heads craned as
the woman pressed for his answer.  She explained that she had seen each
of Egoyan's previous films, had enjoyed them tremendously; it was just
*this* film, she said, this was the one that she didn't "get." Finally,
Egoyan gave in and answered her question.  Here is what the last scene
in the film meant, he explained, his four- or five-word declamation a
stark and numbing negation of the gentle, almost languid spirit of the
film, which invites the audience to its own discovery.  The "what
happened" is simple enough to explain, but you can't really understand
it unless you're fully caught up in the cinema when it unfolds in front
of you.
     If you're like me, when you first hear that the director of
SPEAKING PARTS and THE ADJUSTER has made a film centered around the
patrons and employees of a strip club, you probably say "uh-oh" and
start flipping through the paper to find out what else is playing.  But
you shouldn't.  Previous films had established the Canadian Egoyan as
an austere, clinical filmmaker with a cold grip on his characters'
collective well being.  In EXOTICA, Egoyan's detachment is like a
melting icecap, or a striptease--shrinking away, peeling off layer
after layer of the soft-shelled characters he's investigating.
Moreover, it seems as though he's actually fond of these people.
     Obviously, the sleaze potential for such a story is tremendous,
but EXOTICA is an ambitiously sexual film that doesn't embarrass the
viewer.  Exotica itself is a lush and fantastic place--sort of a
sinister cross between The Playboy Channel and a Fellini film, with a
thundering Leonard Cohen soundtrack.  Christina (Mia Kirshner) is the
star dancer around whose history the film revolves.  The other at-first
inscrutable characters include tax auditor Francis (Bruce Greenwood),
rare bird smuggler Thomas (Don McKellar), Exotica's creepy master of
ceremonies Eric (Elias Koteas, with a great FM-radio voice), and Zoe
(Arsinee Khanjian, pregnant at the time with her and Egoyan's son), the
woman in charge of the proceedings at Exotica.  Much is made of the
erotic conundrum at the heart of a striptease (or, one supposes, an
erotic film): the dancer's actions are meant to arouse and excite the
patron, who is helpless to be anything but a passive viewer.  At
Exotica (as in, one supposes, an erotic film), voyeurism is a
frustrated alias for emotional intercourse, and mother figure Zoe
respects the power of those relationships, even as she zealously
protects her dancers from customers who commit the ultimate
transgression of touching a performer.
     On a theoretical level, Egoyan is well aware of the relationship
between Exotica (the club) and EXOTICA (the film), the ways in which
movies have always commingled voyeurism and cathartic emotional
experience.  In the post-modern era, erotic films have tended to either
indict or (mostly) shamelessly indulge the viewer.  Egoyan's
achievement in EXOTICA is singularly fitting, as he yokes the
experience of the movie audience to that of the audience in his film,
acknowledging erotic needs without condemning them, and stripping down
the obsessions that color a life.
     But on a more basic level, EXOTICA is simply a very wise film.
Even though its explorations are quite serious, there's something of a
sense of humor, and the spectacle of Exotica itself, quite unlike the
typical big-city strip club, is somehow reassuring.  After shooting was
complete and Egoyan's crew began dismantling the set, the building's
owner begged them to leave Exotica intact.  Egoyan refused, ensuring
the club's status as a fleeting construct of the cinematic imagination,
in existence for as long as it takes to sit in the dark, eyes on
Egoyan's deeply felt psychoerotic spectacle.

Title
Review for Unzipped (1995)
     Who would have thought that one of the year's most satisfying
movies would be a 79-minute documentary about a clothing designer?  A
year ago, who would have guessed that Robert Altman's fashion industry
barbecue, READY TO WEAR (then called PRET-A-PORTER), would seem so
baggage-laden, and that unknown documentarian Douglas Keeve's doting
portrait of Isaac Mizrahi would seem lighter than air?
     Your mileage may vary, but for this jaded movie-goer, UNZIPPED is
an unmitigated treat, as much a relief from the practiced heaviosity of
Hollywood buckbusters as an air-conditioned movie house is from the
burning city streets.  Keeve's movie feels so free because it's a
portrait of the fashion industry from the inside, from a vantage point
that those with cynical intent could never reach (it's no secret that
Keeve and Mizrahi were in the throes of a relationship during the
shoot, but any reference to this has been excised from the finished
product).
     This is perhaps the most absurd of all big-ticket industries, and
Keeve shows what it feels like from the inside, when it lets its guard
down.  Mizrahi looks as much like a Peter Pan as any pop superstar,
using NANOOK OF THE NORTH as a springboard for his fall collection or
cavorting with beautiful supermodels as though all the streets of New
York lead to Neverland.  What's at stake, though, is his professional
reputation.  In the opening scenes, we see a little crowd following
Mizrahi through Manhattan as he reads the decidedly unflattering
reviews of his latest collection.  This tragedy in miniature sets the
story in motion, as we watch Mizrahi struggle to recreate his own image
as well as some cool clothes.
     Followers of the biz will no doubt enjoy seeing Mizrahi at work,
expounding on his personal philosophy, switching into depressive mode
when he learns that Gaultier may beat him to the "Eskimo chic" punch,
and confessing to his mother that he used to steal money from her purse
as a child (home movie footage reveals that he sported that Eraserhead
'do even then).  Douglas Keeve works stylishly enough to suck in the
unconverted, as well, with sometimes-arty composition within the frame
and occasional inserts of film leader to remind us of the documentary
process.
     The centerpiece is the all-important fashion show in New York's
Bryant Park, captured in full brilliant 35mm color with swooping crane
shots and a throbbing soundtrack.  The glossy shots of the catwalk
itself are intercut with more jittery footage from backstage, as the
models struggle to change from outfit to outfit, and Mizrahi himself
hops around, coaching them like a high school drama teacher.  These
scenes are breathtaking, and Keeve helps us understand what all the
fuss is about, even if we still believe the whole business is a little
weird.  We come away feeling like we know a little bit about Isaac
Mizrahi, even if the movie concentrates conspicuously on painting a
picture of the fashion industry as a perfect world, and turning Mizrahi
into a hero.  But when you consider the standard Hollywood alternatives
for hero worship (Stallone, Segal, et al), that might not be such a
bad thing after all.
DEEP FOCUS: Archived Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Title
Review for Doom Generation, The (1995)
Written, Edited, and Directed by Gregg Araki
Starring James Duval, Rose McGowan, and Jonathon Schaech
U.S.A., 1995
     The opening credit refers to this as "A Heterosexual Movie by
Gregg Araki," and while fans may recognize the cynicism, this certainly
qualifies as the director's most het-friendly movie to date. Set pieces
at convenience stores, cheap motels, and in the wide-open American
spaces will be familiar to straight audiences of all backgrounds.
Cameos by the likes of Perry Farrell, Parker Posey and Heidi Fleiss
will delight hipsters, and the soundtrack is straight out of a
Lollapalooza show. As Amy Blue, Rose McGowan's breasts are showcased in
the great Hollywood tradition, while the ass shots of her male co-stars
are kept to a minimum.  And when Jonathon Schaech, as Xavier Red,
starts licking his own semen off his hand after masturbating, well,
whoops, I guess he's just kind of weird.
     Actually, he's just kind of a classical bad influence on our
teenage heroes, the kind that Jordan White's mother probably warned him
about once upon a time. Jordan (James Duval) and Amy are teenage
lovers, and they've been together for about three months, which makes
it a serious relationship. Amy spends most of the movie hopped up on
crystal meth, so she doesn't eat much, while Jordan is the kind of kid
who favors chili dogs from the corner 7-11. Jordan's meek but sincere,
affectionate but whiny, while Amy is an assertive loudmouth who takes
refuge in a flamboyant vocabulary of four-letter words and much
eye-rolling. The two of them are confused innocents, the kind who make
doe eyes at one another and mutter sweet nothings like "You're the
bright red cherry on top of my sundae," and "I hope we both die
simultaneously." And when Jordan breaks off a love-making session in
Amy's car, confessing that he's afraid of catching AIDS, she wails up
at him plaintively, "But we're both virgins!"
     That will change soon enough, as will their status as
innocents.  The transformation is helped along by Xavier's entrance,
when Amy and Jordan help him escape bloodied but mostly unharmed by a
knife fight.  Jordan's affable as usual, but the newcomer grates on
Amy's nerves so much that she ejects him from the car. It's no good,
though, because Xavier's back in their lives when he saves them from
certain doom at a convenience store.  There's a lot of splattered
blood, and even a decapitation, but the violence here is played
strictly for laughs, and Amy and Jordan escape into a garish night of
primary colors that deliberately recalls Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN
KILLERS.
     At this point, Araki's still playing the young punk filmmaker,
and THE DOOM GENERATION is loud and snotty, with a cruel, icy sense of
humor.  But soon, the film begins to explore the relationship between
Amy and Jordan, and Xavier is developed as a sexual catalyst, and even
a liberating element. In one shot, Jordan's sitting on the floor next
to the bed, and Xavier's head is dangling over his shoulder.  "How long
have you and Princess Leia been a happy little couple?" he asks, and if
Jordan doesn't realize it's a challenge, we do. Xavier watches from the
shadows as Amy and Jordan make love, and a little later, when he's
seduced Amy himself, Jordan will watch through a window and take a long
walk before returning.  And when Amy tries to justify sleeping with
Xavier in the context of her continuing relationship with Jordan,
Jordan just looks at her and says, "Whatever, Amy," without a hint of
sarcasm or bitterness.
     The biggest surprise in THE DOOM GENERATION is how seriously
Araki starts to take these kids, who seem at first to have been set up
as easy targets for his skewering of American youth, red, white, and
blue. There's a lot of sex, but none of it is played for comedy, and
all of it has its place in giving voice to the muted emotional
relationships between the three kids. Anyone who's familiar with
Araki's M.O. will be hip to Xavier's game, but it's very intriguing to
watch as the tough, knowing Xavier works his way ever closer to Jordan,
using Amy as a pretext. And when Xavier finally does make his move, the
picture positively swoons, with quick cuts, gentle lighting, and
flesh-on-flesh dissolves. It's as though Araki (who also edited the
film) spent most of his time in post-production working on just the
last fifteen minutes of the movie.
     But everything in THE DOOM GENERATION is just about right, and
to my eyes, it makes a lot of what has passed for great filmmaking
lately look mighty tired. Araki's kids are disenfranchised, lonely, and
desperate to put on hip airs, but they connect as human beings in a way
that Larry Clark's KIDS never do. Their post-adolescent sexual longings
make Gus Van Sant's TO DIE FOR look like cheap soap opera. And stuff
like REALITY BITES and NATURAL BORN KILLERS is revealed as the
self-conscious sham that it is. Doritos and chili dogs are part of the
landscape, but Araki's mining a far more significant vein of our pop
culture, and one suspects that no matter how thick the satire is laid
on, Araki's got a lot of all three of these kids in him.
     Caveat: You can't expect the guy who made THE LIVING END to be
happy cobbling together a slice-of-life teen comedy about life on the
run or even just how great it is to let go of our sexual inhibitions,
and indeed he doesn't. I'd hate to spoil the ending for anybody, but
I'd be remiss in my duties if I didn't note that it's far from pretty.
I have a lot of respect for what Araki's doing, but I do find myself
wishing he had looked a little harder to find a way out. These kids pay
a heavy price for discovering themselves, and Araki demonstrates that
he's a master manipulator of hearts, minds, and guts when his road
movie centerpunches its audience across the median and into the
oncoming traffic. There are folks who will no doubt love the movie for
being such a wrenching experience, and probably even more who will
never forgive it.

Title
Review for Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle (1994)
     Somebody write a masterpiece for Jennifer Jason Leigh--please.
     The withering wit of the legendary American writer Dorothy Parker
is the best source material any American actress has had since THELMA &
LOUISE drove into the Grand Canyon, and Leigh does wonderful things
with it in the new literary biopic, MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE.
The throaty drawl she delivers her lines with may not be entirely
accurate (Leigh studied tapes of Parker's voice, though some scholars
have suggested that Parker probably spoke differently in her youth),
but it certainly lends an appropriate, insistent rasp to Parker's
trenchant poetry and one-liners.  Her sympathy is apparent and complete
for the Dorothy Parker that she creates--a tragic figure whose fall
from literary grace and relentlessly bad luck with men fueled her
propensity for morbidity and cynicism.
     Dorothy Parker was the most famous member of the Algonquin Round
Table, a cadre of New York writers who met for lunch daily at the
Algonquin hotel on Manhattan's West 44th Street beginning in the 1920s
(for a New York movie, this one has surprisingly little New York in it,
relying overwhelmingly on pretty interiors).  The movie draws a
broad-brush outline of her life, beginning around the time of her
firing from VANITY FAIR.  That incident cements the friendship of
drama critic Robert Benchley (Campbell Scott), who quits his job at the
magazine in a protest against the "stupid" decision to fire
Mrs. Parker.  Benchley is indeed Parker's greatest friend, and could
perhaps be the great love of her life, if the two of them weren't
already married.  The moments when the movie absolutely hits its mark
are the ones illustrating the unconsummated love between Mrs.  Parker
and Mr. Benchley.  That relationship rings so true (and is so well-
performed) that it manages to anchor the whole film--which needs it.
We see characters talk about forming a magazine devoted to
sophisticated discussion of New York ("Why not call it the NEW
YORKER?" someone asks), we watch Mrs. Parker struggle ever-so-briefly
to come to terms with Hollywood, and we get to eavesdrop on the titular
"vicious circle"  of authors (all of whom besides Parker are virtually
unknown today), but none of this is compelling and most of it is
unconvincing.
     Alan Rudolph, the quintessential L.A. director and Robert Altman
crony, obviously cares about this woman's story, but he honestly has
little to add to it.  Some viewers may be encouraged to do a little
reading and research of their own (which they will find more rewarding
in a historical sense), and God bless them for it, but few will find
this to be a satisfactory exploration of the woman and the environment
she worked in.  As long as it's enough to let Leigh show her stuff and
toss around a few choice passages from THE PORTABLE DOROTHY PARKER,
the whole thing glides along nicely.  But other scenes, which rely on
fresh dialogue (by Rudolph and co-writer Randy Sue Coburn) to give the
impression that the writers are having a smashing time with themselves,
are pretty but dull.  The low point comes when Rudolph trots out a
psychotherapist to explain the problems of Parker's dysfunctional
literary family--presumably for the benefit of the audience, since
Mrs. Parker doesn't seem to learn much from his observations that she
didn't already know.  If Rudolph was doing his job, the audience would
know it, too.
     But it's worth the outlay of eight bucks just to see Leigh bring
Dorothy Parker back to life in her own image.  In the film's closing
scenes, when Leigh plays Mrs. Parker as an old woman, her
transformation is nearly complete.  Whether or not Leigh's character is
a faithful recreation of the Algonquin Round Table's most famous
member, it's a luminous creation of its own, and one that lives on in
the memory after the film itself has faded.  One of these days, Leigh
is going to get a great part in a great movie (SHORT CUTS, though
ambitious and admirable, was not that movie).  Until then, we can hope
that this performance will open up new doors for her and get a part in
a film that succeeds as film, not just as an interesting character
study that offers Cliffs Notes to history.

Title
Review for Nattevagten (1994)
     The first indication you get that this movie might suck comes in
the very first scene, when, just as a television report makes mention
of a brutal stabbing, someone knocks over a bottle of red wine.  This
sort of club-footed imagery could be quaint if it weren't for the
director's irritating use of cheap, incidental shock tactics (Boo!
Just kidding) to get a rise out of viewers.  For a movie that flirts
with prostitution, mutilation and necrophilia, NIGHTWATCH is
dispiritingly timid.  By the time truly weird things start to happen,
the movie has already worn out its welcome.
     The story, promisingly enough, concerns a law student (Martin) who
takes a job as a night watchman in a morgue.  Every night, he must
steel himself to patrol the corpse storage room, up an aisle in between
a half-dozen bodies on gurneys, with blue toes sticking stiffly out
from under white sheets.  The audience shares Martin's apprehension,
and weird stories about corpse abuse and reports of a serial killer on
the loose (one of the bodies is wheeled into the morgue on Martin's
shift) add to an aura of perversity and dread.
     Unfortunately, we also have to put up with a standard-issue buddy
story.  Martin's pal Jens is a free, vulgar spirit and a practical
joker.  The two have girlfriends (who are fairly incidental to the plot
until one of them becomes a damsel in distress), but naturally each of
the men understands things about the other that their lovers never
can.  The character development that this secondary plot involves pays
off toward the end of the film, when Martin begins to wonder just who
the killer might be, but by then your eyelids may be dropping.  The
film-festival crowd I saw it with (Chicago) seemed to love the movie,
but the twists and turns that so entranced them are the same sort of
meaningless whodunit tease that gave BASIC INSTINCT a reason to
live.  Eeny-meeney-miney-mo, pick a killer by the toe ... but I
digress.
     Director Ole Bornedal has infused a few of the early scenes with
an admirable tension, but undercuts that atmosphere as he struggles to
set up the story's complex denouement by repeatedly dwelling on the
relationship between Martin and Jens.  And one truly disconcerting
sequence involving a missing body is thrown away and never explained or
alluded to again.  The first unremarkable hour is almost redeemed by
the climax, which is undeniably exciting and in which one of the leads
is forced to figure a most unsavory way out of a brutal dilemma.
Still, the final scenes borrow heavily and without inspiration from the
recent history of Hollywood action films.  Certainly it's a kick for
buffs of the macabre to see a reasonably intelligent, well-acted film
(with subtitles!) set among so many corpses, but as far as the
possibilities of the horror film, NIGHTWATCH is treading strictly
shallow waters.

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
I'm not quite sure what to say about MARS ATTACKS!, which is
obviously the work of a deranged genius. When Tim Burton's
twisted alien invasion comedy really works, it's breathtaking
and hilarious in equal measure. And when it doesn't work,
it's just dull. I'm not even sure it works more often than it
doesn't, but where it counts -- that is, when this gleefully
evil invading force from the red planet gets down to the
business of blasting us to kingdom come -- MARS ATTACKS! is
brilliant.
MARS ATTACKS! is based on a rather unsavory series of trading
cards released by Topps in the 1950s, and it takes its cues
from the same sources as this summer's INDEPENDENCE DAY --
old alien invasion flicks, disaster movies, and big-budget
special effects extravaganzas. But unlike INDEPENDENCE DAY,
which was a painfully middle-of-the-road appeal to the
hearts, minds and wallets of America, MARS ATTACKS! has a
fully developed and very personal sense of wonder about it.
The big difference is that while INDEPENDENCE DAY celebrated
the resilience of human beings, MARS ATTACKS! portrays us as
the greedy and hapless schmucks that we are.
The title sequence is just splendid -- an incredible swarm of
flying saucers rises out of the canals of the Red Planet and
then storms Earthward through the solar system in formation.
The spinning metal saucers are dead ringers for the invading
forces of movies past, and their first appearance on the big
screen in combination with Danny Elfman's thundering,
theremin-driven score is absolutely jaw-dropping. It's so
overwhelming that, I swear to you, I had trouble breathing.
The movie lays low for the next 40 minutes. We get a glimpse
of the alien leader, resplendent in a purple-sequined cape,
when a television message is broadcast to the people of the
world -- naturally, the only way to communicate with
earthlings is to preempt our regularly scheduled programming.
But mostly, the first act is spent developing characters,
setting up mildly comic situations, and drawing a quirky but
dishearteningly drab picture of America according to Tim
Burton. It's a good thing that the most compelling
personality in the movie belongs to the aliens, because
Burton's just not interested in making more than caricatures
out of his human stars.
Anyone who comes to MARS ATTACKS! expecting to see a lot of
one favorite actor is bound to be disappointed -- with few
exceptions, these characters are dispatched as the film
progresses. Jack Nicholson is a lot of fun as the President
of the United States but fizzles as a sleazy Las Vegas hotel
developer. Rod Steiger does an amusing enough take on Dr.
Strangelove's Buck Turgidson, Glenn Close brings some star
power to the role of the First Lady, and Martin Short is a
Presidential aide who meets the Martians in the White House's
"Kennedy Room," a secluded nook where he unwittingly tries to
seduce an alien dressed up as a big-haired, pointy-breasted
sexpot (Lisa Marie, the Burton flame who played Vampira in Ed
Wood) -- in an earlier scene, it's made clear that the aliens
studied human sexuality in the pages of an old issue of
Playboy.
Sarah Jessica Parker hosts her own TV show and Michael J. Fox
is her newsman husband. The octogenarian Sylvia Sidney has a
funny part as the old woman who cackles, "They blew up
Congress!" and plays a decisive role in the defeat of the
alien menace. Jim Brown and Tom Jones are the film's
Vegas-based heroes, and director Barbet Schroeder (REVERSAL 
OF FORTUNE) has a funny cameo as the unfortunate French
president. Also on hand and underutilized are Annette Bening,
Pierce Brosnan, Pam Grier, Lukas Haas and Natalie Portman(the
latter two also show up in Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE
YOU).
The real stars, of course, are the computer-generated
Martians, and they're fantastic. With bare brains glistening
atop their grinning skull-faces, round egg-eyes with red
pupils darting this way and that, these animated invaders are
malevolence incarnate -- Joe Dante's GREMLINS are the closest
equivalent in recent memory, but Burton's little monsters are
more inventive. The film's raison d'etre are the scenes of
crimes against mankind -- the most famous monuments of the
world crumble under the alien assault, Easter Island is
turned into a bowling alley, and the nasty little buggers
perform hideous medical experiments on captured humans. The
sheer level of mayhem is staggering, especially when the
aliens make their first attack, blasting human beings into
iridescent skeletons. Parents are urged to pay special
attention to the PG-13 rating -- it's earned.
The special effects vary from charming to astonishing to
deliciously cheesy, and at least a couple of shots of mass
destruction seem to have been engineered specifically in
response to INDEPENDENCE DAY, although MARS ATTACKS! was in
production long before that film's release. Cinematographer
Peter Suschitzky, who makes the most of Wynn Thomas's wildly
imaginative production design (Thomas helped define the Spike
Lee style), actually took time off from his MARS ATTACKS!
regimen to shoot CRASH for David Cronenberg. Cronenberg's
movie will almost certainly be more somber -- it won't be
released in the U.S. until early next year -- but MARS
ATTACKS! is surely a similarly elegant nightmare. This is not
a nice movie. (And which studio executive was duped into
giving Burton $70 million to make it?)
By setting the film's final scenes in the nearly empty,
holocaust-ravaged America that INDEPENDENCE DAY conveniently
avoided, Burton's invasion epic suggests that the world we've
got may not be worth saving until many of the people on it
are dead. The victims of his invasion are naive, greedy, or
disastrously self-absorbed -- and a good thing, too, since
the movie's wicked charm is dependent on our ability to take
this invasion partly as a wish-fulfillment fantasy. The
surviving cast members are the innocents and the
entertainers, who triumph by determining that the alien
invaders -- the ultimate elitists -- are actually susceptible
to the kitschiest strains of American pop culture.
Ultimately, this messy masterpiece is the year's funniest
comedy and a weird, winking affirmation of the power of the
people.

Title
Review for Mute Witness (1994)
Written and Directed by Anthony Waller
Edited by Peter R. Adam
Cinematography by Egon Werdin
Music by Wilbert Hirsch
Starring Marina Sudina, Fay Ripley, Evan Richards, and Oleg Jankowskij.
Russia/Germany/Great Britain 1995
     MUTE WITNESS is really two movies in one. The first half is a
creepy, nearly hallucinatory thriller with style to burn and camera
moves torn from Brian DePalma's playbook. The second half is a comic
action picture, with quick bursts of violence perforating the corkscrew
plot and ugly Americans tearing up the roads of Moscow. The switch-over
is disconcerting until you get into the mood of the film.
Writer/director Anthony Waller has created a skillful homage to scary
movies, and if the whole thing winds up off-balance, it's probably
because he's still a little loopy from years of intoxication on pseudo-
political thrillers and cheap slasher films. You can smell it on his
breath, and this film is his way of passing you the bottle.
     Russian actress Marina Sudina stars as Billy Hughes, the
witness of the title. She's an American make-up effects artist shooting
a dreadful horror picture on the cheap in Moscow with her sister Karen
(Fay Ripley) and an American B-movie director, Andy (Evan Richards).
She can't speak, which makes her situation all the more precarious when
she's locked into the old film studio after dark--she resorts to
telephoning her friends and tapping urgently on the phone receiver to
try and get their attention.  While she's trying to find help, Billy
stumbles stumbles across a threesome (the cameraman and an actor from
Andy's film, along with an unknown woman) who are apparently shooting a
porn flick on the sly. But as Billy watches from the shadows, the movie
turns into a snuff film--the woman is brutally murdered at the end of
the scene.
     As Billy runs away, she's plunged into a cat and mouse game
with the two men. Chased through hallways, stairwells, and even an
elevator shaft, she searches for a way out of the building in a
breathless series of set pieces that emphasize her hopeless physical
disadvantage against the larger men. MUTE WITNESS has a keen sense of
geography, and the camera movement is choreographed against the
positions of the actors to sustain a remarkable cinematic tension.
Sudina has a keen sense of her character, too, playing Billy as
determined but terrified, smart but vulnerable. Her performance, along
with Waller's sure, straightforward direction, render some of the
script's more obvious implausibilities irrelevant in favor of sharp
audience identification with Billy. And when the veracity of what she
saw is called into question--was the "murder" she witnessed really
just a clever special effect?--the audience, too, is forced to
reconsider its own experience of the murder on screen.
     This one was a labor of love, and it shows. The film's history
dates back at least to 1985, when Waller, then a director and editor of
movie trailers and music videos, filmed the scene featuring Sir Alec
Guinness as "The Reaper." Principal photography finally began in
October of 1993, and was subject to bad weather and delays. MUTE
WITNESS was originally written to take place in Chicago, but was moved
to Moscow, partly for economic reasons. The relocation works wonders
for the story, adding a layer of isolation for both the American
characters in the film, and for the (primarily English speaking)
audience watching it. The fairly extensive Russian dialogue is not
translated, and we're as much at a loss to understand those
communications as Billy is to make her own meaning clear. An excellent
score, composed and recorded in Russia by Wilbert Hirsch, adds texture
to the largely wordless environment, underscoring Billy's silent
screams with piercing crescendos. And the ready-made movie environment
of the Mosfilm studios is a wonderful backdrop for some virtuosi
filmmaking.
     Unfortunately, too many of those truly exciting moments are
crammed into the first segment of the film, and the remainder dwells a
bit heavily on the expected unexpected plot twists and a missing item
that bears no relation at all to what's important in the
film--Hitchcock would call that a MacGuffin, and its presence is just
one of the ways that MUTE WITNESS makes reference to its own genre.
Still, a bogus gimmick is a bogus gimmick, and Waller isn't quite
Hitchcock.  Even worse is Waller's decision to bring Karen and Andy
back into the picture as ineffectual comic relief. It's probably part
of an efficient joke about bumbling young American directors working
abroad, but Andy's presence is a little more irritating than it should
be.
     But if MUTE WITNESS ultimately disappoints, it's because it
starts running too fast and just can't keep up the pace.  Joyously
manipulative and happily morbid, the movie's style might be closest to
Danny Boyle's downbeat SHALLOW GRAVE or Kenneth Branagh's even more
exuberant DEAD AGAIN (it's better than the former, but not up to the
high standards of the latter). Still, MUTE WITNESS is a hard-won battle
from a filmmaker who has already doubtless started looking for ways to
top himself.  When Waller figures out how to apply this giddy level of
craft to a project that doesn't meander and muck about in the trappings
of its own genre, it should certainly be something to see.

Title
Review for Species (1995)
Directed by Roger Donaldson
Starring Natasha Henstridge, Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Forest Whitaker
'Sil' and Ghost Train Design by H.R. Giger
U.S.A., 1995
     Contrary to what you may have heard on the net and elsewhere, the
first half of SPECIES is actually a charming little B-movie. It's not
so much that the film's troubles begin halfway through, but that it
makes a string of bad decisions that forfeit both our goodwill and our
willing suspension of disbelief. Still, if it wasn't MGM's flagship
release for the summer movie season -- say, if Roger Corman had
produced a low-budget version of the same script for his movie series
on Showtime -- I can't imagine it would have taken near the critical
drubbing it seems to have garnered.
     The premise is delicious, if a little incredible: aliens have
responded to our search for extraterrestrial life by solicitously
beaming back a DNA code. Humans being what we are, we decide to
experiment with the stuff, fabricating a syringeful of the otherworldly
stuff and then injecting it into a human ovum and growing a small army
of human/alien crossbreeds. Silly us. A few die, others are frozen for
future study, and one darling little girl, known as Sil, is kept in an
isolation chamber for study (she has grown to an apparent 12 years old
over the course of a few months). This gives her a lot of sublimated
anger, and when the team of scientists led by Ben Kingsley finally
decides to gas the child, she breaks through the chamber's glass and
escapes.  And since this little kid soon grows to womanly proportions
and sets out to fulfill her biological imperative to breed (conceivable
killing off the human race as she makes tiny monsters), Kingsley sets
out after her.
     The early scenes seem to cement our identification with Sil
(Michelle Williams). Her wide eyes establish her as the loneliest
little girl on the planet, and she projects a palpable sense of
betrayal when the cyanide gas is turned on and Kingsley mouths down at
her: "I'm sorry." Even when she kills a transient, she seems blameless,
like a wild animal escaped from captivity.  Before she grows a cocoon
and morphs into an adult, we watch her months-old mind cope with
adolescence. The artist H.R.  Giger, who designed the Aliens in the
original Alien, worked on Sil, too.  The "Ghost Train" that chases Sil
in her dreams is all his creation (funded, in fact, by the artist's own
money), and symbolizes menstruation, which is actually a mild
foreshadowing of the transformation to come.  Along with the grisly
cocooning sequence, these are the only potentially disturbing scenes in
the film.
     Just a little later, Sil is full-grown and played by model
Natasha Henstridge, who is undeniably gorgeous and makes the whole
movie look just a little too much like a cosmetics commercial.  Her
exploits from then on are episodic (in much the same way as producer
Frank Mancuso Jr's films in the seminal Friday the 13th series), as she
seduces and dispatches men in a guileless search for one suitable for
breeding. That's the fun part.  Unfortunately, it's intercut with the
comparably tedious exploits of Kingsley's posse.  Forest Whitaker is an
empath who has the fortuitous skill of sharing other people's feelings
over videotape.  Michael Madsen gets the requisite Michael Madsen role.
And so on, with Alfred Molina and Marg Helgenberger (both perfectly
adequate in undemanding roles) rounding out the team.
     You'd think that one night in L.A. would be long enough for a
sex object of Henstridge's caliber to try mating with about a dozen
men, but the script is too clunky and methodical to let her really have
at it (though she does go shirtless in at least four, maybe five
scenes). A little more development of Sil's character would have gone a
long way toward adding a little bit of weight to the same situations,
since the audience is predisposed to identify with her early on (she's
half human, after all). The less said about the dialogue, the better, I
suppose, though these actors struggle mightily with it. The special
effects, which consist mainly of Sil's varying transformations into
alien form, range from the wickedly effective (early on) to the ho-hum
(the last 20 minutes or so, when less really would have been more). And
the direction is by Roger Donaldson, a competent thriller maker (NO WAY
OUT, THE GETAWAY) who either lacked the clout or was uninterested in
making a more substantial horror story from this material.
     I saw SPECIES at the end of a week which also included
screenings of BELLE DE JOUR, THE LAST SEDUCTION, and the original
ALIEN. I think ALIEN is the best of that lot, and it's a good example
of the kind of movie SPECIES billed itself as (Giger worked on both).
But the thing about all these films is that they are meditations on the
female by male filmmakers, and all of them dwell conspicuously on the
bizarre: BELLE DE JOUR's casual masochism, THE LAST SEDUCTION's
trenchant moneylust, and ALIEN's horrified look at the reproductive
system.  SPECIES exhibits a similar morbid fascination with issues of
pregnancy and the female body.  It's fitting that Henstridge's body is
on display during much of the movie, since her body, with its capacity
to morph and transform, is the really terrifying object that the film
revolves around.
-- 
DEEP FOCUS: Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
       Imagine, if you like, that SE7EN's Detective Somerset (Morgan
       Freeman) has come out of retirement. He's been drawn back
       into the homicide department by the disappearance of his
       beloved niece. The investigation draws him out of the
       previous film's nameless city to the relative serenity of
       North Carolina's Research Triangle, where he finds that his
       niece's case fits into a pattern of abductions of beautiful
       young women. Three of them have been found dead -- molested
       horribly and left in the woods to be eaten by animals -- but
       Somerset guesses that the others are being held captive by a
       "collector" of some sort. Set on stopping this guy, who has
       taken the vile nom-de-crime of "Casanova," Somerset puts his
       considerable compassion and wisdom to work at cracking the
       case. I guess you could call this fictional movie EIG8T.
       But in a nutshell, that's pretty close to what's going on in
       KISS THE GIRLS. Instead of Somerset, we have Washington,
       D.C.-based forensic psychologist Alex Cross, the protagonist
       from a series of crime novels by bestselling author James
       Patterson. Since he's also given flesh-and-blood presence by
       the formidable Freeman, the film already has echoes of SE7EN,
       which can't hurt since the latter film was a surprise smash
       hit. Even taken on its own, it's hardly a bad idea for a
       movie. Patterson's novel earned wide praise from fans of the
       genre, who praised the novel's characterization and were
       impressed by the story's twists and turns. The movie, I'm
       afraid, is another story.
       Fortunately, Klass and director Gary Fleder (the forgettable
       THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD) are blessed with
       fine performances by Freeman and Ashley Judd, two actors who,
       I suspect, were more or less put on autopilot for this one.
       Freeman turns in an expert, off-hand performance that recalls
       the serene wisdom of Somerset. (Freeman's a good enough actor
       that he really doesn't need the early scene where he talks
       the gun out of a suicidal woman's mouth just to demonstrate
       his character's sensitivity and compassion.) Much as I enjoy
       that character, I'd like to see Freeman stretch out a little,
       and here's hoping that I'll get my wish in the next few
       months, when he stars in Steven Spielberg's AMISTAD and the
       not-a-disaster-movie-*really* HARD RAIN.
       As a thriller, KISS THE GIRLS is by the numbers. We've got
       the fish-out-of-water-with-a-badge, a cop who's gone outside
       his jurisdiction because he has a personal stake in the
       investigation. We've got the killer's hidden lair, which the
       cops must discover in a race against time to save his next
       victim. And while the scenes (two of them!) where Kate kicks
       righteous ass without the help of a male rescuer are
       tremendous crowd-pleasers, they're staged without much
       ingenuity. Judd plays Kate strong and smart, but I would have
       liked to have seen more emphasis on the smart. The so-so
       cinematography and catch-as-catch-can editing technique are
       augmented by a distracting sound mix that, if you see the
       movie in digital sound, has those already cliched wooshing
       noises careering through the movie theater in an attempt to
       whip up a sense of unease.
       We've also got the obligatory yucky relationship between
       Casanova and his pretty female victims. Their trauma is only
       hinted at -- I think a better (and probably darker) movie
       might have given us a longer look inside that makeshift
       prison block, and would have forced us to care about the fate
       of those women. (I'm told that the novel included a subplot
       allowing Kate a relationship with one of Casanova's other
       victims that's missing here.) Instead, the movie barely
       acknowledges their pain, and seems only fleetingly concerned
       with fleshing out the character of Casanova (the most
       unsettling insight coes from a scene where we find out that
       he's an Internet geek, swapping photos of his victims by
       email). I wanted to loathe him, but found myself not moved
       much by anything he did. Perhaps ironically, the unconvincing
       treatment of the villain and his deeds makes the movie's
       queasiest touches -- a post-mortem photo of one of the
       victims, badly battered, or the attempted rape scene in the
       final reel -- seem uncomfortably gratuitous, or even
       titillating. For a picture that deals with a sexual
       psychopath who I'd imagine makes Hannibal Lecter look like a
       gentleman, KISS THE GIRLS plays as pretty light
       entertainment.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Gary Fleder
       Written by David Klass
       Based on the novel by Richard Patterson
       Starring Morgan Freeman and Ashley Judd
       U.S., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
THE ENGLISH PATIENT opens with one of the film's many
touchstone images -- somebody is touching brush to paper,
drawing seemingly inscrutable lines with some precision. We
wonder whether this is some unfamiliar language, but as the
credits progress, the image takes on the shape of a human
figure, swimming. The image, we will later learn, has been
copied from the ancient paintings on the wall of a desert
cave.
The cave of swimmers, as it is known, is discovered by a
geographic expedition engaged in mapping out the Sahara
Desert for the British government. The next day, those
explorers will be taking refuge against a huge windstorm that
fills the air with sand. Two lovers-to-be are holed up in a
truck that strains against the ferocious clamor outside. One
of them, inspired by the danger, begins to tell the other
stories about the wind -- the Aajej, the Ghibli, and the
Simoon, a wind so terrible that a nation declared war on it.
The winds are harbingers for these characters, like the
waters that sweep a swimming man downstream no matter how he
struggles against the current. Nations at war conjure up a
ferocious storm, tearing lovers apart and bringing others
caroming together at odd angles. THE ENGLISH PATIENT is the
kind of movie that makes you want to interpret everything you
see, that makes you keenly aware that everything can have
meaning.
Director Anthony Minghella (TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) has freely
adapted Michael Ondaatje's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel into
a flavorful melange, weaving through time from 1944 Italy to
late 1930s Egypt and back again before tracing careful steps
tying the two stories together. In the one tale,
French-Canadian nurse Hana (Juliette Binoche, radiant as
ever) deserts her Red Cross convoy to care for a badly burned
man identified only as "English patient" -- he was rescued by
Bedouin tribesmen after Nazi gunners shot his plane out of
the air over the Sahara. This patient is essentially a corpse
waiting to lose consciousness, but he retains some shred of
good humor; under interrogation over his nationality, he
cracks, "I'm a bit of toast, my friend -- butter me and slip
a poached egg on top."
Nationality matters a great deal as World War II winds down,
and being revealed as a German would be the worst fate to
befall a patient in an Italian hospital circa 1944, even one
so badly scarred as this. We soon learn that he's not English
at all; he's the Hungarian Count Laszlo de Almasy (Ralph
Fiennes), and he was a cartographer in the employ of the
British government. It's the tale leading up to that
beautifully rendered but ill-fated flight over the Sahara
which constitutes the second, arguably more compelling, story
of THE ENGLISH PATIENT.
It's an absolute pleasure to follow these characters through
the film's 160-minute length. Minghella is a confident
director surrounded by expert performers, and he's created a
swooning, full-tilt epic of desire, betrayal, war-tattered
lives, and landscapes shaped like a woman's body. Navigating
a world littered with bombs and mines, these characters
nurture passions that will reverberate across borders and
echo through time. Chief among these is the wickedly
intellectual affair between Almasy and Katherine Clifton
(Kristin Scott Thomas), the wife of another member of his
expedition.
Meanwhile (at least in terms of screen time), Hana is falling
in love, not with her patient, but with Kip (Naveen Andrews)
a Sikh bomb disposal expert who enters her life by shooing
her away from the monastery's piano -- he fears the Germans
have mined it, and he's right. Kip sets up camp nearby, and
helps Hana care for her patient. He tries to read Rudyard
Kipling aloud to the patient, and the two of them get into an
argument over the prose. "Your eye is too impatient," the
patient scolds him. "Think about the speed of his pen."
Later, Kip will lure Hana to his bedroom with a trail of
snail-shell lamps, and will send her on a rope-and-pulleys
tour of a frescoed church. Such shamelessly romantic conceits
are the stuff that makes this film go, and mostly it just
goes beautifully.
Scott Thomas's performance has been singled out for special
praise, but in truth they are all remarkable, from Fiennes'
handsomely tormented lead to Willem Dafoe's mysterious,
thumbless Caravaggio. John Seale's cinematography is mostly
stunning, although the sameness of the orange tones gets to
be a little much in such a lengthy outing. Film editor Walter
Murch (instrumental in the editing and sound design of
APOCALYPSE NOW) doubtless deserves special praise for his
world-class technique -- Minghella acknowledges that the
film's mostly seamless feat of flitting over and over again
from setting to setting was largely conceived and achieved in
the cutting room. Murch's instinctive cutting style is a big
part of what makes THE ENGLISH PATIENT so convincing. In the
final scenes, as Binoche hitches a ride to Florence on the
back of a truck, we cross-cut from a shot of that biplane,
once again in the sky over the Sahara, to a shot of Binoche's
face, reaching some kind of resolution at last, to a shot of
trees on the roadside, filtering and flickering the sunlight
as we ride past, and finally to the sun itself, blazing pure
white on the cinema screen (the credits roll over this in
black). I can't explain exactly what such a sequence means --
but if I could, it wouldn't be pure cinema. It is.
The big-screen tricks Minghella brings to bear on this story
aren't exactly high-concept, but they work like a charm --
the biplane flight that opens and closes the film is
impossibly romantic and surreal (to ironic effect), Fred
Astaire sings "Cheek to Cheek" on the soundtrack (to
devastating effect), and a crucial plane crash in the latter
reels is almost frighteningly effective -- you feel like the
audience at one of the first demonstrations of moving
pictures, who reportedly leapt out of their seats with fear
as a locomotive apparently bore down upon them. If anything,
THE ENGLISH PATIENT has too many ideas and too much
portentous symbology for its own good -- a common affliction
of movies that try to pack too many signs and metaphors from
source novels into their own text. For its flaws, and despite
a patch during the third act where it seems to lose its way,
THE ENGLISH PATIENT is one bold melodrama. From beginning to
end, it's gasping for air and striving for greatness. It
never quite reaches that summit, but it's an intoxicating
view all the same.

Title
Review for Frankenstein (1994)
     If you know Kenneth Branagh's work, you know he has the
irrepressible penchant for grand themes and sense of high drama that
lend themselves as well to spirited adaptations of Shakespeare as to
unabashed pop melodrama.  So when his much-heralded adaptation of
FRANKENSTEIN first hits the screen, you find yourself a little queasy
with anticipation. After all the box-office hits and Orson Welles
comparisons, isn't the boy due to let us down? But the potential, and
the promise....
     The performances, of course, are grand. Branagh directs himself
with panache, and DeNiro is, even under his hideous creature makeup,
unmistakably DeNiro. As the monster, he is both menacing and undeniably
tragic, but no real surprise here. Still, the film could have been a
disaster had the role been given to a less-talented actor.  Tom Hulce
reminds one immediately of his role in AMADEUS, but his presence is
welcome. Helena Bonham Carter at first has little to do, but by the end
of the film has given an affecting performance in a role which could
easily have been maudlin, overbaked, or--worse--inconsequential.  John
Cleese truly has little to do, but his presence, too, charms the film
fan.
     Sadly (but perhaps unavoidably), the first third of the film seems
a bit of a mess. Specifically, Branagh's task is to introduce the
character of Victor Frankenstein, establish his obsession with the very
nature of life and death, set up the intellectual and ideological
conflict between Victor and the academic establishment, and somehow
manage to build up to a rousing creation scene ("It's alive ...
alive") all within the narrow bounds of the film's first act. So we
have spinning cameras, odd shots through wide-angle lenses, weird jump
cuts and dissolves, all of which propel the story along at a feverish
pitch. Branagh is a virtuoso, but the audience spends this portion of
the film oddly detached. Perhaps it doesn't matter; more or less, we
all know the story.
     The rest is much better. Especially in the final act, Branagh
affords the characters the development and depth that was denied them
early on. It's hard to tell how much of this structure was dictated by
the script and how much was Branagh's work at cutting down the film to
a manageable length--just over two hours, as it happens.  DeNiro's
creature stands in dark and humanitarian contrast to Boris Karloff's
classic Big Dummy, but film buffs who have never read Shelley's novel
may be surprised at how much the original FRANKENSTEIN (and one of its
sequels) dovetails with this one.  At face value, the two films are
very different, but they have many of the same concerns at heart.
     The drama of terror and loss that caps this production of the
story more than makes up for the bland expository scenes that precede
it. Little more needs to be said, except that at least one of Branagh's
wrenching scenes of hypercinema, a public hanging, is among the most
spectacular in film history.
     No, wait--one more thing needs to be said--the score by Patrick
Doyle is not necessarily bad, but it is obtrusive and unwelcome.
Perhaps the SDDS auditorium I saw the film in insinuated the music too
deep into my consciousness, but I kept wishing Branagh and his monster
could just have a quite moment alone, without the damn strings singing
songs of impending doom. Branagh builds up that sense of impending doom
quite credibly without help from the orchestra pit, thank you very
much.
     In total, this is a more restrained and emotionally honest horror
adaptation than Coppola's previous production of BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA
(which any goth aficionado will tell you was anything but). It stands
up well against Branagh's earlier work, but has neither the unbridled
sense of fun that drove DEAD AGAIN or the complete mastery of its
material that made MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING a blast. It does, however,
suggest that Branagh is a filmmaker who is continually extending his
reach and truly seeks to reinterpret source material in a uniquely
cinematic language.

Title
Review for Girls Town (1996)
For the first reel of Girls Town, you just can't get over Lili Taylor. 
Is it possible to remain unperturbed that a woman of this age is playing 
a high school student? Harder still, can you avoid astonishment at how 
perfect she is in the part? With the sure, showy expertise of a De Niro, 
Taylor imbues unwed mother Patti with all the faux fuck-you confidence 
she can muster. It's a deeply felt, dead-on performance, and by the 
halfway point you've forgiven Taylor her own maturity. For all its 
verite pretenses, Girls Town is less about a bunch of high-schoolers 
than it is about a movie director and a cadre of writer-performers 
examining their own feelings about rape, relationships, and American 
womanhood.
The movie's opening scenes sketch an easy friendship between a group of 
four smart/sassy high school outsiders on the verge of graduation: 
Patti, Angela (Bruklin Harris), Emma (Anna Grace), and Nikki (Aunjanue 
Ellis). But about 10 minutes into the film, we get word that Nikki has 
swallowed a fistful of pills and bowed out of life. The remaining girls 
manage to smug Nikki's diary out of her grieving mother's home, and page 
through it at Patti's place, investigating the root of Nikki's despair. 
What they find is cruel and galvanizing -- Nikki had been raped by an 
editor at a newspaper where she interned, and was privately questioning 
the sanity and value of a world where such a thing could happen.
Shell-shocked by the truth of the matter, the three girls begin to talk 
among themselves and come to a realization about their own lives. Emma 
says she was raped last year on a date with a football player. Patti's 
barely sympathetic, wondering what the hell Emma thought she was doing 
with her shirt off in a jock's car. And anyway, Patti's had her own 
share of guys who wouldn't take no for an answer. Pained, acrimonious 
debate ensues as the trio grow more and more angry -- angry about the 
impossibility of saying no, and angry with themselves for being weak, 
for being naive, for putting up with it. "Why do we put up with it?" 
Emma finally asks, once the argument has reached a fever pitch. "We try 
to talk about it, and look what happens. We fight for 20 minutes."
There's the admirable crux of this picture. Girls Town is a political 
film, in that it calls for action. But it's incomplete-it's never quite 
sure how to justify that action, or what form it should take. The trio 
become crusaders for their right to dignity, and it's surely one of this 
year's most stirring movie moments when Emma lobs a concrete block 
through the passenger-side window of that damn jock's car (doing the 
right thing?). They hang out in the bathroom, chatting incessantly and 
scrawling slogans and naming names on the door to a toilet stall. 
"Subvert the patriarchy," Emma writes, and then starts a hall of shame 
list underneath that other students begin to contribute to. The girls 
silence their hecklers, take revenge on the deadbeat father of Patti's 
child, and eventually come face-to-face with Nikki's tormentor. Still, 
the movie has a desperately unfinished quality, and none of these 
subsequent exploits is particularly satisfying. (You keep waiting for 
someone to call the cops on these brazen girls, but nobody thinks of 
it.) Perhaps searching for a resolution missing from the material at 
hand, the film borrows its epigraphs from Audre Lorde and Queen Latifah 
("Who you callin' a bitch?"). The points are well taken, but they should 
have been unnecessary.
Long on characterization but a little short on story, Girls Town is less 
than it could have been, and too self-congratulatory for my own taste. 
Director Jim McKay is best known as a consort of R.E.M.'s Michael Stipe 
(he directed the nearly unwatchable Tourfilm for that band), and Girls 
Town is his first foray into feature filmmaking. The movie was created 
and scripted by committee, but McKay and his lead performers had to 
shoot on a shoestring when, predictably, the group couldn't secure 
funding. 
Then again, Girls Town on a budget would hardly be the same film. The 
movie's slapdash quality is key to its significance. Truth be told, all 
three of the leads look too wise for high school, but that's OK -- 
there's a once-removed quality to their fine, spontaneous performances, 
as the women take a very skillful look back at the girls they once were, 
the girls they wish they had been, or some combination. For all its 
flaws, this one gets extra points for having its uncertain head and 
heart in the same noble place. 

Title
Review for Welcome To Sarajevo (1997)
       Director Michael Winterbottom's new WELCOME TO SARAJEVO opens
       fiercely, with the kind of moment that snaps your eyes wide
       open and makes you remember what the movies can really be
       about. As a wedding party leaves a Sarajevo church, one of
       the members is shot dead by an unseen sniper. The group
       scatters. The bride runs away in slow motion, a vision in
       white. Cut to the press, a cadre of photographers and
       videographers huddled together at a semi-safe vantage,
       cameras clicking in a staccato fury. It's a footnote to
       history recreated in widescreen and Dolby stereo.
       Winterbottom stretches the moment just long enough for us to
       understand its subtext -- how important it is that somebody
       be present to take those pictures, lest this bombed-out city
       be forgotten by the Western world, and what it must mean to
       be a journalist, covering these horrifying everyday events
       but staying (at least in theory) at a clean remove, like a
       Wenders angel.
       If only the rest of the movie were as riveting, as demanding
       of our attention. WELCOME TO SARAJEVO has the makings of a
       small masterpiece, but it loses its way. It's a fascinating
       film, to be sure, even if Winterbottom does resort to such
       hardball tactics as cutting video footage of real Sarajevan
       casualties into the mix in order to focus our attention and
       our sympathies. That's fair play, I suppose, for a film that
       indicts the unresponsiveness of the Western world during the
       years when innocent men, women, and children were being shot
       dead and blown to bits on the streets of the Bosnian capital.
       ("We have to deal with 13 countries in the world which are
       worse than Sarajevo," a United Nations type tells the press
       corps at one point.) But it's used to enliven a film that
       doesn't muster a sufficient sense of outrage through its own
       drama. As social commentary, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is acrid and
       spiky. As cinema, however, it becomes just a little bit dull.
       But it gets by on the strength of its convictions, not least
       of which was Winterbottom's determination to shoot on
       location, beginning in the post-war summer of 1996. If you're
       not familiar with the Bosnian conflict, this film will serve
       as a crash course on the hostilities as well as a record of
       the damage wrought on the city itself. In short, the Bosnian
       capital of Sarajevo was uniquely positioned to take the brunt
       of violence as the former Yugoslavia broke into independent
       nations. Sarajevo was caught in the crossfire as radical
       Bosnian Serbs began a campaign to cleanse Bosnia of Muslims.
       Although tensions between Serbians, Croations and Muslims
       have long sparked violence in the region, Sarajevo was a city
       where all three ethnic groups lived in close proximity, which
       fueled the fires as the war raged on. Eyewitnesses to the
       fighting in Sarajevo reported that neighbors were opening
       fire on one another.
       Based on the nonfiction book NATASHA'S STORY by British
       journalist Michael Nicholson (and "inspired by" actual
       events), WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is the story of the Western
       press corps living in the besieged city, struggling to
       galvanize the world's conscience against the fighting.
       Coverage of what became known as the "bread-line massacre,"
       for instance, when Bosnian Serbs bombed a group of Sarajevans
       waiting to buy bread, killing 16 and wounding many more, is
       shunted into second place on the news programs by the divorce
       of Andrew and Fergie.
       Modeled on Nicholson, Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane) is
       particularly appalled at the world's reluctance to condemn or
       even acknowledge the continuing tragedy. And he's
       particularly drawn to the plight of Sarajevan children,
       especially those at an orphanage he discovers and focuses his
       energy on covering. "As long as the U.N. are here," he tells
       his colleagues, "I'm going to keep those kids on the screen.
       Every night, different child, same message: get me out of
       here." Like his real-world counterpart, Henderson will
       eventually take it upon himself to smuggle one of these
       children, Emira (Emira Nusevic), out of the country.
       Woody Harrelson plays Flynn, a cynical hotshot from America
       who steps into the story he's covering at one point, when he
       carries a wounded civilian out of the line of fire. Rounding
       out the ensemble are Emily Lloyd as a freelancer, Marisa
       Tomei as the American aid worker who wants to get the orphans
       out of Sarajevo, Kerry Fox (of SHALLOW GRAVE) as Henderson's
       producer, and Goran Visnjic as their driver. Much of the film
       depicts their everyday existence at a local hotel, where the
       procurement of a few eggs is cause for celebration. By the
       time Flynn shows up at the Holiday Inn with footage from Serb
       concentration camps -- which are bone-chillingly reminiscent
       of those *other* pain-stricken concentration camps -- the sense
       of outrage is complete.
       But since there must be a story, we're soon caught up in
       Henderson's scheme to get Emira out of the country. Welcome
       to Sarajevo gets certain things just right, like Henderson's
       wife's flabbergasted but understanding reaction to the news
       that he is bringing a Sarajevan orphan home with him. Even
       so, the film remains at a cool distance to these characters,
       never quite forcing our identification with either of them.
       Later, when it's discovered that Emira's mother is alive --
       and wants her back -- Henderson's inescapable journey back to
       Sarajevo is intriguing, but we're not emotionally involved in
       the story. These characters seem almost purely
       representational -- they're different types of people rather
       than people in their own right. I can't help but think a
       little more imagination in the screenwriting department might
       have helped flesh everybody out and make us closer witnesses
       to their desperation.
       Winterbottom is no stranger to the desperate situation. His
       two previous films to receive a U.S. theatrical release were
       the lesbian serial killer drama BUTTERFLY KISS and the Thomas
       Hardy adaptation JUDE, both of which leave you with the oddly
       satisfying feeling of having been whalloped in the midsection
       so hard as to have your breath knocked out of you. (He also
       directed the acclaimed GO NOW, starring Trainspotting's
       Robert Carlyle as an MS victim.) WELCOME TO SARAJEVO has a
       similarly lasting impact. The picture feels slight, and
       disappointingly understated as you watch it. But it's a
       persistent little film, and it sticks with you. Maybe this is
       what it would be like to really be there. Day by day, the
       sickening violence takes on a sameness, and the siege becomes
       unremarkable on its own terms. Still, it scars you. And when
       you leave this country, you're haunted for life by the ghosts
       of the Sarajevans.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Michael Winterbottom
       Screenplay by Frank Cottrell Boyce,
       based on the book NATASHA'S STORY by Michael Nicholson
       Cinematography by Daf Hobson
       Edited by Trevor Waite
       Starring Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Emira Nusevic,
       Emily Lloyd, Marisa Tomey, and Kerry Fox
       U.K., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
Close to the conclusion of William Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet, as the kids seated around me murmured among
themselves, I found myself wondering how many in the theater
did not know how the story was going to end. And then, with a
mix of amusement and distaste, I was wondering if even the
ending would remain the same.
The film retains Shakespeare's monicker, which demonstrates
the film's backhanded fidelity to its source material and
gives it license to go completely nutso with its pretensions
toward modernization. This is modernized, alright, from the
digitally enhanced Mexico City backdrops to the silvery
firearms that take the place of the daggers and rapiers of
Shakespearean verse. What's not modernized is the dialogue,
which is lifted directly from the original text. The
resulting hodgepodge is more than a little daffy, with beefy
guys running around in Hawaiian shirts pointing guns at each
other and saying things like, "Do you bite your thumb at me,
sir?" Not surprising that it's occasionally silly -- what may
be surprising is that, at least as often, it really works.
Australian director Baz Luhrmann (Strictly Ballroom) can't be
accused of playing it safe. In the very opening moments of
the film, which is introduced by an anchorwoman on a TV set
that's dwarfed within the widescreen frame, his camera goes
on a vertiginous high speed tour of Mexico City, spiraling
and zooming above the roofs and in the streets. The supercool
shorthand of a film trailer is adopted for a sequence
introducing this hyperrealistic world with helpful captions
superimposed over screen-filling shots of various characters.
The whole sequence culminates in a gas station showdown
that's enervating in its hysteria -- the original dialogue is
worn here as a badge of courage, with noise and camera tricks
emphasizing hyperactivity above all else. Hell, we even get
the requisite shot of Tybalt (John Leguizamo) flying sideways
through the air blasting from two pistols, a rip-off from
John Woo by way of Robert Rodriguez.
A little later, we're invited to a party at the Capulet
place, where Harold Perrineau plays Mercutio as a drag queen
in a white wig. The cinema is so thick and the cuts so quick
that for a time it looks as though Oliver Stone has been
asked to direct Priscilla, Queen of the Desert. For the first
couple of reels, Luhrmann seems to be hoping that a sustained
mania can focus attention on the quite considerable
production design and divert it from the mouthfuls of
Elizabethan prose that his principals don't seem comfortable
with. It can't, quite, but the design is as impressive as the
conceit, and if you're not thoroughly turned off by either,
you may be hoping Luhrmann can actually make this stuff mesh.
Well, it's fortunate that Romeo Montague (Leonardo DiCaprio)
has been invited to this party at his rivals' den, because
it's there that he happens across the radiant Juliet Capulet
(Claire Danes). Love at first sight, and all that. But soft
-- a sweet, understated love scene that tumbles from balcony
into the blue-lit Capulet swimming pool gives the film a
much-needed emotional grounding, even though it remains
lighter than air. DiCaprio is an unassuming romantic lead,
and Danes a sweetly idealistic receptor for his young
passions. You believe that these kids like each other, and
you're rooting for them, which is key -- even if you know how
things turn out.
The world surrounding our two star-crossed lovers is meant at
every turn to illustrate and amplify the passions and pain
felt in their everyday lives. And so it is that gigantic
signs, one proclaiming 'CAPULET' and the other 'MONTAGUE'
tower above the city, flanking an immense statue of the
Virgin Mary. So it is that the familiar red-and-white "Enjoy
Coca-cola" logo is morphed into a sign reading "Wherefore
L'amour?" (Just for giggles, there's a hot-dog stand called
Rozencranzky's.) Romeo's beach retreat is the huge proscenium
of a ruined stage, towering next to a sea and sky that roil
with the turbulence of the storyline. This may all seem like
a little much, but I've got to admit that I love it.
The fashionable pop-song soundtrack is very much of the
moment, featuring tracks by such current flavors as Garbage
and The Cardigans. A little more adventurous is a
gospel-choir rendition of Prince's "When Doves Cry" that's
inserted into the film at exactly the right moment. Des'ree
contributes a pair of original numbers, but when a scene of
DiCaprio and Danes entering liplock on-screen is accompanied
on the soundtrack by a song titled, get this, "Kissing You,"
it's a little too literal for my tastes.
Of course, Shakespeare shouldn't really need a soundtrack,
and this film uses a sound-and-fury crutch to supplement its
drama. That's not to say Romeo and Juliet doesn't have great
moments, and my favorite is Mercutio, bleeding to death on
the beach: "A plague on both your houses!" At other times,
though, all this accessory stimulus tends to lessen the
emotion of the story. Luhrmann can't resist stretching the
sentiment in the final scene, which allows his lovers one
last look at one another this time around, but such maneuvers
only go so far.
One obvious shortcoming is that of our romantic leads.
DiCaprio and Danes are uncommonly good-looking, probably the
best pair of kids who could have been picked to play this
role. Their star appeal is undeniable, and they're both
earnest enough that they're easy to watch. But just about
everyone else in the cast is better at playing Shakespeare
than these two. To see Pete Postlethwaite bring such life to
the part of Father Laurence or to hear Miriam Margoyles make
the Nurse's Elizabethan dialogue sound for all the world like
plain English is to understand the rich wallop that Romeo and
Juliet could have packed in the hands of an abler cast.

Title
Review for Crow: City of Angels, The (1996)
"There will be another," the ads for this sequel proclaimed, and why 
not?
True, Brandon Lee is dead, but there would be no reason for him to 
appear in a followup to 1994's The Crow, anyway. The idea of spinning 
artist James O'Barr's original comic book series into a sequel franchise 
revolves around the notion that a different startled soul would come 
back from the dead in each movie, taking its own righteous vengeance 
against the world. Given that basic framework, the story could move in 
any number of directions.
Of course, it doesn't. Stubbornly, The Crow: City of Angels backtracks 
to the beginning of the previous film, when Lee's Eric Draven found 
himself drawn back out of his grave to do a Charles Bronson on the thugs 
who tortured him and his girlfriend to death. I remember the first film 
primarily as a harrowing exercise in brutality. In flashback, we see the 
most excruciating crimes exacted on Eric and his lover, and then we 
watch in real-time as Eric pays each perpetrator back in kind. It's loud 
and repetitive, true, a sadist's delight -- but it's also horrifying and 
fascinating.
City of Angels gives us more of the same, but less skillfully. There's 
an audience guaranteed for a film like this, although bad reviews and 
poor word-of-mouth will likely ensure that it won't be much of a 
success. In fact, Miramax subsidiary Dimension Films was so fearful of 
the critical reaction to this picture that reviewers were shut out of 
advance screenings. (I've never understood the reasoning behind this 
tactic, since good notices have never been key to the success of movies 
like The Crow.) So much for any confidence in the worthiness of their 
followup.
This time, Ashe (French-accented actor Vincent Perez) is retrieved from 
his watery death (he and his young son were shackled together, shot, and 
then thrown off a pier) by the crow who serves as his link between the 
worlds of the living and the dead. Perez might have some screen presence 
if he's given something to do with himself, but here he's simply thrown 
in front of the camera as a pretty face. At first, he's shivery and 
frightened, but he quickly recovers from the shock of his own death and 
becomes a badass biker from beyond the grave. He's befriended by Sarah 
(Mia Kirshner), presumably an older version of the child who narrated 
the first film. Kirshner, so beguiling in Exotica, is here an 
exquisitely photographed blank. Tattooed with angels' wings, Sarah is 
just about as lovely as women come, but she serves no purpose, not even 
as seductress.
The gang of punks who killed Ashe are ostensibly commanded by Judah 
(Richard Brooks), but a far more interesting choice as leader would have 
been Iggy Pop, who plays a gaunt fellow named Curve. Iggy, all bones, 
veins, and drawl, is the only one who seems to have shared in the 
aesthetic of ruin that defines this film. Like all good things here, 
he's dispatched too soon and without much imagination. In the meantime, 
we're subjected to tedious glimpses of Judah's compound, where bondage 
is the order of the day and hot wax is poured over naked bodies in S&M 
fantasies that would seem shy of the cutting edge even if they weren't 
distinctly secondhand. Even the soundtrack is tired. More than anything 
I've seen from Hollywood lately, City of Angels smacks baldly of product 
-- it's a movie with a lousy script but a great look.
Critics have been quick to fault the direction of MTV veteran Tim Pope, 
but his work isn't that bad per se. He's got a good eye, and some 
intriguing visual ideas -- if anything, this movie has a few too many 
scenes of ridiculously striking imagery. His major stylistic failing is 
that he can't seem to direct an action scene, and the quick, nonsensical 
cutting that ensues is reminiscent of a low budget kung fu movie. But as 
director, he must also shoulder the blame for the little screenplay that 
wasn't, the performers who couldn't, and an apparent lack of ideas on 
the parts of everyone involved. Who bought David S. Goyer's anemic 
script, anyway? The producers of this Crow were either too dim to 
realize their story was doomed to be a hollow rehash, or too cynical to 
figure their audience would know the difference.

Title
Review for Strange Days (1995)
Directed by Kathryn Bigelow
Written by James Cameron and Jay Cocks
Starring Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett, and Juliette Lewis
     There's a lot of sex in STRANGE DAYS.  A lot of sex, and a lot of
violence.  Director Kathryn Bigelow and her screenwriter cronies James
Cameron and Jay Cocks understand well that the sleekest new technology
is immediately turned to the seediest purposes.  Their protagonist,
L.A.  ex-cop Lenny Nero (Ralph Fiennes), understands it too, and he's
the consummate salesperson for virtual sleaze, circa 1999.  When Nero
watches a potential client "jack in"--a contraband silver rig on top of
the mark's head wires the contents of a mini CD recorded with the full
sensory experience of another person directly into his brain--he sports
the sharp grin of a guy who loves the junk he's dealing as much as the
junkies do.  After the client's spent a few quality moments feeling
himself up through his business suit, Nero cuts off his feed.  "You
were just an 18-year-old girl taking a shower," he tells the client.
And, of course, there's more where that came from.
     The filmmakers also understand that good help is hard to find.
After he's just played back a pornographic disc of a half-hearted
lesbian encounter--from the point of view of one of the women,
naturally--Nero coaches one of the two performers from the clip. "You
should move your eyes a lot slower," he explains.  "Like you're making
love with your eyes." The girl stares back at him silent and
uncomprehending, her eyes a complete blank.  Nero's a lost romantic in
the age of sensory overload.
     The minidisc system is called SQUID, a charming acronym for
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device.  That's just another way to
say The Movies, for which SQUID is sort of a doublespeak stand-in.  Nero
is the director, who lives vicariously through the exploits of
criminals and neo-porn stars as his own life moves in ever contracting
circles.  Among the clips in highest demand are the ones recorded in the
most extreme of circumstances, like the botched robbery sequence that
opens the film.  The scene is one long take from a criminal's p.o.v.,
and the event doesn't end happily, which pisses Nero off.  Nero doesn't
deal in "blackjack clips"--that's snuff clips, the ones where some
poor sucker winds up dead before it's over.
     The clips that Nero loves best, the ones he keeps in a shoebox
back at his house, are home movies, full-sensory snippets from his life
with Faith (Juliette Lewis), the girl who used to love him but now
sings in a nightclub for sleazy music mogul Philo Gant (Michael
Wincott).  This shady circle of friends also includes a flunky named Max
(Tom Sizemore), a tough cab driver named Mace (Angela Bassett) and a
prostitute named Iris (Brigitte Bako).  When Iris comes running to Nero,
begging frantically for help, he shrugs her off.  But the next day,
when a blackjack disc of a particularly traumatic murder is anonymously
delivered to him, Nero starts to wonder what Iris had to tell him that
was so important, and whether he might be next in line.
     What a kick--STRANGE DAYS is an action movie with real
characters and uncommonly skillful actors.  Ralph Fiennes as Nero is a
real tragic hero, one who's fallen from grace with his former employer
(the L.A.P.D.) and his former lover.  Fiennes is s o damn likable in the
role--he gives the scuzzball a fuzzy surface.  Angela Bassett's
ass-kicking turn as Mace, the only woman who's willing to stand by Nero
through and through, is actually a secondary role, but she brings it
straight to the fore and rein forces the star status she won in WHAT'S
LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT? Juliette Lewis gets to stretch out just a
little, even though she's once again typecast as a sexpot for scumbags
(can't she talk to her agent about this?).  The supporting cast, which
includes t he chameleon-like Vincent D'Onofrio as a rogue cop, is
excellent as well.
     In very literal ways, STRANGE DAYS is a movie about sensory
overload.  If you see the movie in a house wired with digital sound and
a big screen, it will undoubtedly get your blood flowing.  Tellingly, in
this age of bright lights and big sound, one character from the film is
knocked into a coma when his SQUID unit is wired to overamp the signals
to his brain.  Moreover, the interaction of people wearing the devices
and crossing their own experiences with the playback amounts to a
conceptual tour de force, with one experience informing another,
brutality overlapping terror, and pleasure licking the heels of
sadism.  The single most punishing moment of STRANGE DAYS owes a
specific debt to Michael Powell's definitive treatment of voyeuristic
pleasure, PEEPING TOM (1960), and I could see couples huddling closer
together and others slouching lower in their seats as a true high-tech
perversion played itself out on-screen.  STRANGE DAYS isn't always an
easy or pleasant film, and in the age of the easygoing bullet-laden
blockbuster, it's sobering to see a movie where representations of
violence are, well, violent.
     More to the point, Kathryn Bigelow cements her reputation as a
stops-out action director who encourages audiences to keep their brains
engaged as she steps on the pedal.  I'm not a big fan of her ex-husband
Cameron's movies (they include ALIENS and TRUE LIES), but it's hard to
explain how his admittedly exhilarating approach to an action scene
differs from Bigelow's similarly expert tactics, which also work
wonders.  Maybe it's her background as an artist that shapes these
quick cuts into a montage that makes sense, or her intellectual
fascination with the first-person point of view that shapes the SQUID
sequences.  You don't have to be intellectually aware of how good she is
at all of this to appreciate the sheer rush of the fast action, but the
experience is heightened by her sure control of thematic concerns.  And
at any rate, this is miles ahead of her previous POINT BREAK.
     The special effects are so well done that they're nearly
unnoticeable, and aside from a couple of fireworks in the night sky
over L.A., I can hardly remember what the digital effects shots were.
The throbbing soundtrack, featuring the music of bands like Tricky and
PJ Harvey (who might actually still be current in 1999), is a savvy,
welcome switch from SF movies with pop soundtracks comprised
exclusively of 70s retreads or bad techno.  Despite a fairly contrived
screenplay, STRANGE DAYS is altogether hip, slick, and wicked.  What
you get out of it it is probably proportionate to how much credence
you're willing to give it, and it seems that most folks will love it or
hate it.
     When the end credits started rolling, the crowd at STRANGE DAYS
was fractured in a way I haven't seen in a long time.  There was
spontaneous applause--that much you expect--but then the clapping hands
were overwhelmed by a loud chorus of hisses.  Couples left the theater
engaged in heated arguments, and larger groups stood in the lobby
afterward, flashing back to the movie's most violent moments.  One point
of contention is the ending, and that's definitely a cop-out.  Any $40
million production has to be mediated by the aesthetic needs of a mass
audience, but the tidy 15-minute denouement here is so at odds with the
controlled chaos that brews for the first couple of hours that it
leaves a bad taste.
     All that having been said, what's up on-screen is still quite an
experience.  It is rare that a Hollywood blockbuster can encourage
debate in a movie-going audience, and rarer still that there might be
something truly disturbing lurking under a high-gloss surface, but
there is substance in STRANGE DAYS.  Nero is the vessel for the
knowledge it imparts, which has to do with sorting out desire, regret,
and nostalgia and learning to make the best of this world.  Like Nero,
who has to learn to give up his aluminum-coated memories of what once
was to live in the here and now, STRANGE DAYS struggles to come to
terms with the relationship of memory to reality, the future to the
present, and what could be to what is.

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
I once watched a film teacher suffer a meltdown after a
classroom screening of THE LAST HOUSE ON THE LEFT. LAST HOUSE
was Wes Craven's debut feature, an exruciatingly graphic
rape-revenge film shot almost documentary-style in 16mm, and
something about it was more than our instructor could bear.
As the lights came up, he stalked to the front of the
classroom muttering that he didn't think anybody should be
allowed to watch such a pernicious film. This was the
first-ever convincing argument, he said, in favor of
censorship. He threw around words like "inept" and "artless,"
and the students in the class were put in the uncomfortable
position of having to defend the merit of some of the most
sadistic instances of humiliating sexual violence ever
committed to celluloid.
"Did you know it was based on Ingmar Bergman's THE VIRGIN
SPRING?" I finally asked. Stopped him right in his tracks. He
stood up there for a few long moments, scratching his chin,
wondering if it could possibly be so -- could this vile,
torturous excuse for cinema actually have been inspired by
the much revered work of one of Europe's greatest filmmakers?
And more importantly, was the director a lot smarter than he
had been willing to give him credit for?
Since then, Wes Craven has gone on to more auspicious
projects, including THE HILLS HAVE EYES as well as the first
and last movies in the Nightmare on Elm Street series, an
uncommonly imaginative knock-off from the slasher boom of the
late 70s and early 80s. The series went downhill as it
converted Craven's genuinely creepy Freddy Krueger character
into a stand-up comic, and one of the characters in Craven's
newest movie, SCREAM, comments on that: "They all sucked,
except the first one."
Craven is a filmmaker of ideas, but he's not entirely
successful at bringing those ideas to fruition. Still, his
movies are consistently more interesting than their
mainstream Hollywood counterparts. THE PEOPLE UNDER THE
STAIRS is an elaborate metaphor for the class struggle in
Reagan's America, complete with Ron and Nancy surrogates. His
SHOCKER was a misfire, a heavy metal slasher movie that was
aimed perhaps a little too narrowly at its target audience --
but who would guess that Craven would make his points about
the pervasiveness of television as our new fantasy realm by
directly referencing Buster Keaton's SHERLOCK JR.?
Television plays a big role in SCREAM, as well. In the
brilliantly conceived opening sequence, cute-as-a-button
Casey (Drew Barrymore) gets a distasteful phone call from a
psycho who wants to play games with her. When she asks why he
wants to know her name, he tells her it's because he wants to
know who he's looking at. When she asks what he wants, he
tells her he wants to see what her insides look like. Reduced
to a quivering wreck, Casey cowers in the corner, next to a
TV screen that glows blue from its blank video signal. Later
in the movie, a bunch of drunk high schoolers will gather
around another TV set to watch HALLOWEEN, and that movie's
electronic soundtrack will become SCREAM's background music.
Craven is interested in the contrast between movie reality
and objective reality -- or at least reality as it appears in
his movie as compared to the reality that appears in everyone
else's movies. You follow? The chief conceit of SCREAM is
that it knows it's a scary movie, and its characters -- at
least the smart ones -- are keenly aware of the conventions
that make scary movies such a predicament for the people
caught in them.
So Neve Campbell (she was in THE CRAFT, and a TV series
called Party of Five) plays Sidney as a more savvy version of
the prototypical babe-in-distress. Like her pal Tatum (the
terrific Rose McGowan from THE DOOM GENERATION), she can run
verbal circles around her male counterparts, but may be a
little too headstrong for her own good. The movie begins in
the wake of Casey's death, and the local high-schoolers
aren't exactly shedding tears over her grave. These kids are
into gallows humor and gossipy speculation on the identity of
the real killer, who wears an elongated death's head mask
that becomes a hot item for pranksters at the local high
school. So many of the people in this community are so
twisted that it seems any one of them could be the killer. In
fact, the screenplay is gleefully peppered with clues that
could implicate nearly every character in the movie.
Sidney's father is leaving town for the weekend, which means
that she'll be at home alone -- her mother was murdered in
gruesome fashion just a year ago. Sidney's cellular-phone-toting
boyfriend Billy (Skeet Ulrich, also in THE CRAFT) has a
bad habit of climbing in through her bedroom window, and
becomes a prime suspect in Casey's murder. Sidney is getting
phone calls from the same creep who rang Casey, and they're
starting to carry the uncomfortable echo of her mother's
murder. The TV-ready Courteney Cox is aptly cast as a
uniquitous reporter from a tabloid program, and David
Arquette plays the awkward Sheriff's deputy who may have
something to hide. Also involved is Randy (Jamie Kennedy), a
nerdy video store clerk who lectures his peers on how to
survive a horror movie (don't have sex, don't do drugs, never
say "I'll be right back").
Craven's main triumph here is proving that plausibility
needn't have anything to do with effective filmmaking --
SCREAM made me jump in my seat more effectively than just
about anything since THE EVIL DEAD. Here's a movie where the
killer stalks victims through the grocery store in full
Halloween regalia, where a video camera broadcasts images
into a news truck on a 30-second delay (what, they're waiting
for the picture to bounce back off the satellite?). It's a
big bloody crowd-pleaser, and a treat for thoughtful fans of
the genre. Knowing references to the genre include a
discussion of Jamie Lee Curtis's breasts and the cameo
appearance of Craven himself as a school janitor in Freddy
Krueger clothing. But when Tatum makes passing reference to
"something out of a Wes Carpenter movie," it really is one
wink too many.
What's more remarkable than the labored reflexivity is
Craven's reconstruction of a nearly picture-perfect slasher
movie with some important twists. (A year ago, he thought he
had contracted with Miramax to remake THE HAUNTING, but plans
went awry.) SCREAM has a casual feeling about it, almost like
something done on a lark. He's angling to create something
akin to the conceptually audacious WES CRAVEN'S NEW
NIGHTMARE, which was a fairly sober meditation on why we need
horror stories (and one of his most engaging films). Still,
SCREAM ultimately disappoints because what's missing from
this "scary movie" is a sense of what's really scary. If
SCREAM had even one truly horrifying moment, a scene that
made you shudder instead of just jolting your ass out of your
chair one more time, it might carry a little more weight. As
is, it's simply the slasher movie to end all slasher movies
-- too bad it comes about 10 years too late.
As always, Craven's reach exceeds his grasp. The film is shot
in anamorphic Panavision, but unlike his compatriot John
Carpenter, Craven has no real sense for how to use the
widescreen frame. The screenplay (by first-timer Kevin
Williamson) has too many clever ideas that never really pan
out. The constant references to HALLOWEEN in particular are
more hamfisted homage than plot device, and the
aforementioned video camera gimmick is wasted. And while the
movie is smart as a whip about the conventions of horror
movies, it's conspicuously silent on the subject of what
drives them, or why we enjoy them.
Finally, I'm not sure what we're supposed to make of the
delirious final reels, in which the killer explains, against
all apparent evidence to the contrary, that "Movies don't
create psychos; they just make psychos more creative." Good
point, but are we expected to take a psycho's word for it?
And why is a television literally instrumental in one
character's death? Never mind -- it's all so fast and fun
that you barely have time to wonder at such stuff. Strap in
and enjoy the ride.

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
     David Fincher, whose brilliant career as a director of music
videos encompassed such highs and lows as Madonna's "Express Yourself"
and Rick Springfield's (weird but forgotten) "Bop 'Til You Drop," has
helmed an almost overly stylish thriller about the evil that men do and
the myriad ways to punish them.  And this thriller is so unlikely on
its surface that when the machine kicks into high gear and the movie
really starts to matter to us, its impact seems all-encompassing and
lingers for days after viewing.
     So whether we like it or not, we've got SE7EN to keep us company
at night.  That's not a typo--that's how the title appears on-screen,
flickering white on black during the opening sequence as though
scratched directly on the film, while a remix of Trent (Nine Inch
Nails) Reznor's singularly creepy hit "Closer to God" throbs on the
soundtrack.  We're brought full-circle a couple of hours later, when
the credits roll backwards as the brand-new David Bowie/Brian Eno tune
"The Heart's Filthy Lesson" blares in digital stereo, releasing us to
the open air outside this hermetic little nightmare.  It's obvious that
Fincher has mastered the fine art of creating a mood.
     Saddled with a script that's mostly middle-of-the-road, despite
its fashionable proclivity toward the grotesque, Fincher fashions a
mean little movie about sin, the city, free will, and the most
grotesque notions of justice.  Fincher's feature debut was the
ambitious ALIEN 3, a cerebral, nearly charmless meditation on bodies
and alienation that was reviled by fans of ALIENS, James Cameron's
space fantasy about marines with big guns.  The followup already seems
to be a bigger success, thanks in large part to a more conventional
premise and the presence of two big Hollywood guns--Morgan Freeman and
Brad Pitt.
     The story is conveniently divided into days of the week.  Pitt is
Mills, the new detective on the force.  Freeman is Somerset, the mentor
who's trying to ease the younger cop into the bowels of the city while
defusing his impatience.  Near the film's beginning, the corpse of a
grossly overweight man is found in a dark room, face down in a heaping
bowl of pasta that he was fed from until his insides ruptured.  Behind
the fridge: the word GLUTTONY is scrawled on the wall.  Soon after,
police discover the body of a rich and prominent defense attorney who
has literally been bled dry.  Writ in large letters of grue on the
carpet: GREED.  Somerset is onto this one right away--gluttony and
greed are two of the seven deadly sins.  The killer of both men, he
surmises, is an intelligent psychopath who intends to continue his
grisly ways until all seven sins have been illustrated in a fashion
that may put you off your popcorn.  The two go after the killer, Mills'
brash style countered by the wary, jaded technique of Somerset (who is,
natch, set to retire at the end of the week).
     The screenplay, by a fellow named Andrew Kevin Walker who
supposedly got his nastiest ideas while working at Tower Records in
Manhattan (hell, I believe it), isn't much on the surface, just a whole
bunch of musings about moral vigilantism and the absence of goodness
and light in urban America tempered by the buddy-buddy banter of the
two cops.  There's even a thankless role for the cop's wife, Tracy
(Gwyneth Paltrow, who is as good as everyone else), and an unlikely
breakthrough that puts the cops right on the killer's tail at the
beginning of the second act.  But it sure works.  The outlandish nature
of at least one of the murders swings the script firmly into comic book
territory, and there's nothing wrong with that.  If the Batman movies
were being made with the sensibility of master comic book creator Frank
Miller, they might look something like this--here's a thriller with a
visual impact so tremendous that it can get away with some shamelessly
outre melodrama.
     Maybe if I watched SE7EN again, I could detect how the whole
becomes something bigger than the sum of its parts, but the work as it
stands is pretty seamless.  Razor sharp performances--especially by
Freeman and the unbilled star who plays the killer--miraculous
cinematography in the near dark by Darius Khondji, and a swirling,
enveloping sound mix all contribute to a dazzling movie experience.
Fincher has us in the palm of his hand about halfway through, when the
film's centerpiece--an extended chase scene riddled by gunfire and
shafts of sunlight--breaks the tension of the long exposition.  The
killer leaps over barriers and ducks in and out of shadows like the
phantom of the opera, and Fincher distills that neo-Gothic atmosphere
without clogging up the works.  The relationship between cops and
killer becomes very real, almost mythic, and SE7EN goes from there like
a greased pig.
     At the climax, screenwriter Walker confronts his characters with
one humdinger of a bad situation.  There's a palpable sense as the
story winds down that something very real is at stake, and the movie's
ultimate moral structure seems to extend into the world outside like a
fog.  As pessimistic as SE7EN ultimately becomes, it's refreshing in
its belief in something larger than the typical bogus moral dilemma.
Because the movie believes in its mission, the climax is likely to
resonate in your head for hours, perhaps days after viewing.  Searching
for meaning in the world it creates, SE7EN finds the dark heart of the
soul and pokes at it 'til it bursts.

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
Director: John McTiernan
Editor: John Wright, A.C.E.
Starring: Bruce Willis, Samuel L.  Jackson, Jeremy Irons
     It's about midway through DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE when Zeus,
played by Samuel L. Jackson, asks Bruce Willis's John McClane, covered
with distasteful grue, if he's okay.
     That pretty much sums up the operating principles of DIE HARD 3, a
focused bloody action machine of a movie.  The film is so tightly
trained on Willis's cop caricature that nothing else beyond his status
as everyday guy caught up in extraordinary
circumstances--again--matters.  No mention is made of the number of
casualties when a New York City department store is blown to bits in
the middle of the day; we're told no one is killed when an explosion
sends a subway car careening through a Wall Street station; subsequent
acts of brutality are just par for the course.  McClane gets bloodier
and grimier, but he just likens himself to the Energizer Bunny and
takes on another thug.
     Only when the mad bomber suggests that schoolchildren will be the
target of his next attack does anybody's death seem to matter.  Oh,
yeah--the mad bomber.  The story, such as it is, concerns a German
military type (Jeremy Irons) who blows up a midtown Manhattan
department store and then phones in to police headquarters demanding to
speak to McClane, who has been suspended from the force in an alcoholic
haze.  A police shrink explains to the cops and the audience that this
German guy is a psychopath with an obvious vendetta against McClane.
Somehow McClane got on the terrorist's bad side, and the bomber's now
out to make his life hell, sending him charging uptown and downtown,
beating the clock and solving riddles and brain teasers to find and
defuse bombs in the city.
     The first half of the movie is delicious--especially so, I
suspect, for New York audiences, who are treated to a terrific paranoid
fantasy set in familiar locations.  One great scene involves a pay
phone and a trash can at 72nd and Broadway, and another shows why the
quickest route downtown is through Central Park.  It's a little
disconcerting to see Willis wandering through Harlem in his underwear
and a sandwich board boasting a racial epithet--the bomber's first
attempt at humiliating him and perhaps getting him killed--as though
Quentin Tarantino has now made movie houses safe for slurs.  It's not
so much the use of an ugly word as it is the feeling that the scenario
was borne from laziness, a need to jump-start a script (by allowing
pawn-shop owner Jackson to save Willis's life) that takes a few
halfhearted NYC-style swipes at racial issues.
     Fortunately, DIE HARD 3 has inventive performers backing up
Willis's star turn, since they have to make up for Jonathan Hensleigh's
script, which is lacking in almost every regard.  Jackson extracts a
real soul from Hensleigh's Angry Black Man (With a Heart of Gold) paper
doll, and becomes the high-strung nerve center of this movie in the
same way that he was the pumping heart driving Tarantino's PULP
FICTION.  Irons -- ever the trooper--has it even worse, in a role that
should be clever and snide but is instead reliant on Hensleigh's rote
dialogue.  Worse, we're never sure whether his stated intention of
revenging himself on Willis is a red herring, since the connection
between them is so incidental and contrived that it matters not one
whit to the story (which was not originally a DIE HARD film).  Irons
never has the good sense to have his adversary shot in the head when
the opportunity presents itself, but at least the script never puts him
and Willis together in a little room to beat the crap out of one
another.  That's something.
     But let's face it.  The script, tepid as it is, is just a coat
hanger for Willis's bloody, grimy, T-shirted exploits, and the exploits
are pretty fantastic.  DIE HARD director John McTiernan, brought back
alive after his foray into megabomb territory with THE LAST ACTION
HERO, takes some interesting chances with straightforward material.
The best scene by far is an ultraviolent set piece in an elevator that
shows the clear influence of Hong Kong crime films, perhaps by way of
(him again) Tarantino.  The culmination of one long scene in an
aqueduct is a cartoony coincidence that qualifies oddly as dream
logic.  Editor John Wright undertakes some energetic cross-cutting as
the New York police force and Willis, many miles away, both work to
defuse an especially nasty bomb, and we get some artsy time compression
in the weirdest places, courtesy a series of jump cuts and funny
dissolves.
     The verdict?  What we have here is a pretty good movie that falls
apart as it moves toward its episodic conclusion, as though whole sections
of the story were dumped.  The story and especially the dialogue are major
liabilities (as is Michael Kamen's stupid, militaristic score), but we're
treated to the work of performers who can pull it out in a pinch.  Did we
mention Bruce Willis?  Anyone who still has the chutzpah to argue with
Willis-as-working-class-hero just doesn't understand American action
movies--and his solid performances in PULP FICTION and the wonderful
NOBODY'S FOOL prove that he is, indeed, very talented.  This one's a good,
exciting flick, and it probably bodes well for the future of action movies
that have a little more there there, if you know what I mean.  And I hope
these folks understand that we really, really, don't need to see DIE HARD
4. 

Title
Review for Feeling Minnesota (1996)
There's a word I'm sure was on the tongues of Fine Line execs
and publicists alike, talking up this unlikely comedy from
first-time writer/director Steven Baigleman. They must have
seen the potential for another "quirky" comedy from an
idiosyncratic director, one who would follow in the footsteps
of, if not Quentin Tarantino, then at least David O. Russell
or the Coen brothers.
FEELING MINNESOTA tries real hard to be "quirky." And part of
the problem is that its quirks are part of an impossibly
contrived plot. The slapdash storyline is pure surface -- you
can't see any of the twists coming, but they don't exactly
surprise you because the story has no interior logic. Like so
many films in the Age of Tarantino, this one coasts into
theaters on the strength of insincere characters and glib
violence.
Your guess is as good as mine why a romantic comedy featuring
stars like Keanu Reeves and Cameron Diaz is allowed to
degenerate into generic gunplay and chaos. The opening scenes
are almost sweet, with Jjak (Reeves) arriving back at the
family home outside of St. Paul for the marriage of his
brother Sam (Vincent D'Onofrio). Jjak left home when he was
just 8 years old, but mother Norma (Tuesday Weld) welcomes
him to the ceremony with open arms, at least until she learns
that he had the poor manners to arrive without a present.
>From that point on, sibling relations grow a little more
strained -- reluctant newlywed Freddie (Diaz) screws Jjak on
the bathroom floor minutes after she takes her vows with Sam;
Mother drops dead of a heart attack after Jjak makes a scene;
Jjak takes the bride with him when he leaves town four days
later.
Sounds like a pretty terrific set-up, right? Hell, I was
hooked. Reeves plays a charming loser whose best romantic
idea is to loot a pet store on the way out of town, breaking
the window to steal a dog and a bag of puppy chow. Diaz is,
finally, a starlet who performs as advertised. She's sulky,
seductive and beautiful, and she and Reeves seem made for
each other. As the two of them cruise down the highway with
their dog, singing along with The Replacements' "I Will Dare"
thumping from the stereo of their stolen car, the goofiness
really clicks. Anything, it seems, could happen.
Too bad, because it's here that the movie makes a U-turn.
Almost immediately, Freddie convinces Jjak to go back to the
family spread and steal the money Sam has embezzled from his
small-time gangster boss, Red (Delroy Lindo). Naturally, Sam
catches him in the act and points a gun at his head. If Sam
actually shot Jjak at this point, FEELING MINNESOTA would be
a really short movie. So instead, we have to endure another
hour or so of Jjak and Sam shouting, pointing guns, and
beating the hell out of one another. This idiosyncratic
romance has suddenly become a guy movie with "black comedy"
aspirations, but to no real effect.
Freddie is the film's lone female catalyst, but no matter --
she disappears at the end of the first act, victim of a
nonsensical plot twist. Courtney Love is billed fairly
prominently, but she winds up looking good doing remarkably
little. She plays a waitress, pouring coffee and making small
talk with D'Onofrio. D'Onofrio is an irritating putz, which
is the role he was hired to play, so good for him. Dan
Aykroyd is better than you would think as a local cop who
gets involved as the sibling rivalry turns nasty. The
performances are all quite good, and I can't really fault the
direction per se. But the script, I think, needed a thumping.
Movies these days have a new amoral fascination with guns.
It's easy to blame Tarantino for this, but he's so far made
pretty good movies about criminals, movies that try hard to
honestly exploit, if not understand, the relationships
between men and how they involve violence, loyalty, and
power. FEELING MINNESOTA, though, hands out the loaded
handguns so early on that they become just props. Everyone in
this movie has the power to kill everyone else at some point,
so when murder is committed, it doesn't come as a shock.
It would have helped to have a little more in the character
department, as well. Sam, it turns out, cooked Red's books to
make it look like Freddie was stealing money from him;
Freddie was forced to marry Sam as her punishment and his
reward. Even so, there's little else in the movie to
distinguish loathesome loser Sam from loveable loser Jjak --
good thing Keanu's the cute one, or we might not know who to
root for. Freddie's cut from the same cloth. Her idea of
success is the kind of part in a Vegas floor show that set
SHOWGIRLS in motion. These characters are truly morose, and
their dialogue is even worse. Freddie on life: "Time is like
an orange." Jjak on his own misery: "I've never felt ...
whatever that word is. Happy."
I kept thinking about Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD, a
similarly "quirky" comedy that took a sudden, startling left
turn into nightmare territory and hit a jackpot. FEELING
MINNESOTA isn't nearly as ambitious as that movie, and maybe
that's the problem. Mucking about in low-key gloom, Baigleman
can't find the energy or exuberance that would make us care
at all whether his characters live, die, or join a Vegas
floor show. FEELING MINNESOTA is low-rent filmmaking that
feels slugglishly, disastrously low-rent.

Title
Review for To Die for (1995)
     TO DIE FOR is an ambitious little flick about the seductive lure
of stardom, the suggestive power of Nicole Kidman's lips, and the
promise of liberation held by a teenage flunky with a handgun who's
willing to lose everything for your love.  The movie is ambitious, and
sounds terrific on paper, but director Gus Van Sant (MY OWN PRIVATE
IDAHO, EVEN COWGIRLS GET THE BLUES) can't pull everything together to
make any impact at all.  It's enough to make you wonder what he's doing
with this script in the first place.
     Nicole Kidman is TO DIE FOR as Suzanne Stone, the small town TV
"weather girl" who makes international tabloid headlines when she's
accused of having her husband Larry (Matt Dillon, doing fine) murdered
by her teenage lover Jimmy (Joaquin Phoenix) and his friends Russell
(Casey Affleck) and Lydia (Alison Folland).  Joyce Maynard's novel is
apparently a fictionalized version of a very true incident in a small
New Hampshire town, but the movie excludes any understanding of that
situation by chasing its own tale, a cautionary comic book painted in
broad strokes and saturated colors.
     Screenwriter Buck Henry and director Gus Van Sant go ga-ga over
their own technique in the first few shots, when Suzanne and other
characters address the camera directly, as though being interviewed for
a TV news special report.  Janice, Larry's lesbian sister, explains
that she knew from the start that Suzanne was a four-letter word
beginning with C (we're left to fill this in from the backs of our own
filthy little minds, but the word she's looking for is cold).  Lydia
holds forth for the camera on Suzanne's philosophy and TV-centric world
view.  Jimmy mumbles half- articulately about how in love he is with
Suzanne.  And the parents of Suzanne and Larry are guests on a talk
show, explaining that they knew the marriage was doomed from the
start.  All of this is intercut, of course, with objective flashbacks
illustrating the events the characters relate.  The novelty of this
approach wears off almost immediately, and the herky-jerky cutting back
and forth from scene to scene becomes tiresome, albeit appropriate to
the movie's theme.
     Maybe it's a shame that the studio has given TO DIE FOR away, both
in the marketing campaign (Nicole Kidman = murderous sexpot) and in the
movie's own title sequence, which runs headlines and lurid tabloid copy
underneath the credits over and over again.  There's really only one
major event in the whole film, and the surrounding material seems
edited by an iron fist wrapped around a machete--Whap! Whap!--no
surprises at all.
     All that's left for the audience is to sit and wait to see the
thing itself happen, and it happens pretty much the way you expect.
You might expect Suzanne's casual cruelty to be shocking, but her
dialogue is strictly rote.  Kidman's performance is perfectly vacuous,
with the corners of her mouth tugging this way and that as she titters
a little over every superficial thing.  Her name is suddenly being
bandied about as Oscar material, suggesting that critics still love it
when a woman can sex it up and play the embodiment of female evil at
the same time.  She's certainly something to look at, but her
performance shares a calculated coldness that turns the movie blue.
     So it's cold, but it's not quite a corpse.  Where is the beating
heart of TO DIE FOR? Well, Van Sant still has style to spare, and his
sympathy is obviously with the kids, who are better drawn than the
other characters.  In a funny way, Lydia is allowed to be the smartest
person in the whole film, reflecting at length on Suzanne's world view
while managing to keep at arm's length, and becoming her own kind of
celebrity.  Pudgy Lydia is the antithesis of Suzanne, who's clearly
Miss America material even if she's not quite wholesome.  And when we
see Susan in her underwear, it's either to make a point of her distance
from Larry or to show her cajoling a promise from her teenaged lover.
Meanwhile, the camera lingers on Jimmy's trembling, naked body,
obviously far more intrigued by the nature of his lost soul than
Suzanne's corrupt one.  More lively is a devilish twist near the end of
the film, and watch out for Canadian director David Cronenberg in a
cameo.
     The real problem is that for a black comedy, TO DIE FOR is
mighty unfunny.  Finally, the movie's own cynicism does it in.  TO DIE
FOR is mainly contemptuous and condescending, with little of the wit or
insight that marks a strong comedy.  Reviewers have been comparing it,
believe it or not, to Pulp Fiction, apparently believing that the two
movies share a hip self-awareness.  But that's dead wrong.  Where
Tarantino worked Pulp Fiction through with an honest, burning urgency
and some kind of moral message that managed to transcend its own
essential brutality (hey, it's more fun than it sounds), Van Sant can't
lift TO DIE FOR out of its own narcissistic meanderings.  Here's a
movie that's very pleased with itself, but doesn't really speak to us.
The message here? Every stereotype you've ever heard is absolutely
true.  If she goes down on you, you'll do whatever she says.  Loser
children with no future live in trailer parks and listen to abrasive
heavy metal.  The world is a stupid, superficial place. (Like we needed
Gus Van Sant to show us that!)
DEEP FOCUS: Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/
bfrazer@panix.com

Title
Review for Fast, Cheap & Out of Control (1997)
       "I've been told by several people, 'You're old fashioned. You
       want to do everything by hand,'" topiary gardener George
       Mendonca complains, defending his continued resort to hand
       shears in trimming his intricately privet-sculpted animal
       creations. "This is the only way you can do it and do it
       right." Snip, snip.
       In some ways the slickest film yet from nonfiction auteur
       Morris (THE THIN BLUE LINE, A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME), FAST,
       CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL is reportage of the highest order.
       Journalism students should dream of making connections like
       these. Cross-cutting among interviews and filmed segments,
       Morris traces the lives of four disparate professionals who
       seem to share nothing but an immersion in their work, and
       then threads them around one another in an intricate
       quadruple helix. The fun is settling into your theater seat
       and wondering just what the hell one story can possibly have
       to do with the other. What Morris manages is something akin
       to an intellectual magic trick, an interrogative sleight of
       hand.
       One of the things that feels different about an Errol Morris
       documentary -- besides the always-striking visuals -- is the
       interview style, where subjects seem to look directly at the
       viewer. Weary of pressing his cheek against the camera lens
       to get this effect during conversations, Morris developed an
       elaborate double-camera gadget he calls, half-jokingly, the
       Interrotron. Through a rig that uses a pair of teleprompters
       to project video images of the interviewer for the subject
       and vice versa, these folks talk, startlingly, right to the
       camera -- to the video image of Morris, and by extension to
       the audience.
       The gardener wonders whether, after his death, anyone will be
       interested in maintaining the garden that he's devoted half
       his life to tending. The robot scientist is more than a
       little pleased to note that his creations may be primal
       examples of what an insect or even an animal is -- a
       complicated set of sensory receptors. The mole rat specialist
       is delighted to catalog the ways in which these vermin
       animals behave like insects, and notes that they may be more
       suited to long-term survival than people. And the circus
       trainer pines for a long-lost ideal that was exemplified by
       world-renowned trainer and showman Clyde Beatty, who starred
       in such serials as ZOMBIES OF THE STRATOSPHERE (excerpted at
       some length here, with affection).
       Starting to detect the patterns? FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL
       contains a multitude of parallels and tiny intersections,
       culminating in what feels like an elegy (the film is
       dedicated to Morris's late mother and stepfather). The film
       is balanced on that airy precipice dividing the already musty
       past from the alternately exhilarating and terrifying space
       that is the future. (The title is taken from Brooks' wish
       that NASA would send a payload of hundreds of expendable
       robots to scurry about the Martian surface, creating a sort
       of road map for the terrain -- fast, cheap, and out of
       control.)
       With able assists from editors Karen Schmeer and Shondra
       Merrill and cinematographer Robert Richardson (Oliver Stone's
       longtime collaborator), this becomes a cinematic contraption
       that's a wonder of narrative divergence and coherence.
       (Further enhancing the picture's wacky intellectual mood is
       the playful score by Alloy Orchestra founder Caleb Sampson.)
       Different story threads inform and comment on one another
       with the serene inscrutability of a Kieslowski film, or a
       surrealist dream. By cobbling together out of these motley
       musings a thesis on the nature of craftsmanship, invention,
       and existence itself, Morris reveals the presence of cosmic
       themes -- creation, evolution, death -- in earthbound lives.
       At the same time, and just as significantly, he pays tribute
       to a consuming passion for one's work. This breakdown of the
       dichotomy between the everyday and the extraordinary is
       likely as profound as anything you'll encounter in pop
       culture this year, and the visuals cry out for the big
       screen. Don't miss it.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Errol Morris
       Edited by Karen Schmeer and Shondra Merrill
       Cinematography by Robert Richardson
       Music by Caleb Sampson
       U.S., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Maximum Risk (1996)
You've got to think twice before you go see a movie with a
title like MAXIMUM RISK.
The title is generic. It's meaningless. And I can't believe
it's good business. When you pick up the phone and dial
777-FILM, how in the world are you supposed to remember that
the new Jean-Claude Van Damme movie, the one that looked kind
of cool in the trailers and is directed by some Chinese hot
shot, is called, geez, MAXIMUM RISK? Yuck.
The movie itself deserves your attention. For sweet bloody
thrills, this one beats the summer blockbuster competition
hands-down. Only MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE came close to delivering
as skillful a thriller, and I'll give Maximum Risk the edge
simply because it's not as slick as the Tom Cruise picture,
and therefore more gratifying in its execution.
Much to my surprise, Van Damme continues to develop as a
pleasant, unpretentious action hero. His track record isn't
as solid as Schwarzenegger's, but he's a hell of a lot more
adventurous than Arnold. In 1993, Van Damme worked with Hong
Kong's premier hardcore action director, John Woo, on a
fairly lame movie called HARD TARGET. (If you can find a bootleg
copy, Woo's radically different director's cut is much better
than what was eventually released.) This follow-up is
directed by Ringo Lam (CITY ON FIRE, FULL CONTACT), whose
Hong Kong films are distinguished action pictures that have
consistently played second fiddle to Woo's more operatic
offerings. The surprise here is that MAXIMUM RISK is a more
effective Hollywood action flick than either HARD TARGET or
Woo's subsequent BROKEN ARROW.
Here's the rundown. Van Damme plays a French cop named Alain
Moreau who is shaken when a policeman friend (Jean-Hugues
Anglade) finds a corpse that's Alain's exact double. Turns
out Alain was separated at birth from his twin brother,
Michael, who has been killed by some Russian heavies (and
some strangely American looking cops). Alain does some
investigating. He finds that Michael had booked a flight to
New York City, and received a message from someone there
named Alex Bohemia. Assuming Michael's identity, Alain flies
to New York and gets tangled up with Michael's girlfriend
(Natasha Henstridge), the FBI, and the Russian mob in Little
Odessa.
That's as much as you need to know. The story is adequate,
but not overly involving -- and the major plot points are
basically explained to you twice, just in case you go out for
popcorn at the wrong moment. There's a love story, too, but I
didn't find it terribly convincing, partly because ex-model
Henstridge is too high-strung in her high-profile debut (she
had precious few lines as the alien ice queen in SPECIES).
She's great to look at, and she can certainly read a line,
but what she does here can't really be described as "acting."
Of course, "acting" isn't really what she was hired for (I
lost track of whether her shirt comes off more often than Van
Damme's).
The movie is exceptionally violent, bordering on gratuity.
(Keep that in mind when planning your date.) The stunts are
spectacular, and the fact that you can spot Van Damme's
stand-in makes his work no less impressive. There's only so
much you can do with a car wreck, but this movie makes crisp,
effective use of pile-ups in a handful of frenzied
destruction derbies. And Lam has a surprising, innovative
sense of exactly where the camera should go to catch any bit
of action.
The main difference between Lam and Woo, I believe, is that
while Woo relies on sheer spectacle to gas up his action show
pieces, Lam has figured out more about using cinematic space
and double-barreled points of view to make things run. Don't
get me wrong -- when Chow Yun-Fat soars through space pumping
bullets out of two pistols and chewing on a toothpick with
glass and confetti littering the air around him in Woo's
HARD-BOILED, it's an amazing moment. But it's a moment that's
hard to reproduce in Hollywood. (For one thing, Hollywood
doesn't yet have Chow Yun-Fat!)
While Woo's Hollywood movies look like the work of a talented
upstart, MAXIMUM RISK is a surprisingly confident picture.
The very first shot of the film is an awkward overhead view
of a chase through the streets of a European city, but Lam's
use of odd camera angles becomes more efficient later on. The
film editing is a particularly savvy complement to Lam's
shooting style, accentuating rather than amplifying the
action.
The performances could have used some fine tuning (in
particular, there's an annoying, overwritten Manhattan cab
driver in the early scenes who should have been toned down or
jettisoned completely), and the movie doesn't always overcome
the limitations of its genre. The story is a little mundane,
although there are some effective moments involving Van
Damme's unrequited feelings toward the brother he never knew
he had. But it's not often that Hollywood cranks out a truly
satisfying action picture, and it's doubly surprising that
this one should come with a mere whisper of publicity. Van
Damme fans should treat themselves to what may well be the
man's best movie, and international action buffs will no
doubt savor this flavorful Hong Kong/Hollywood hybrid.

Title
Review for Spiklenci slasti (1996)
       Moviegoers who regard David Lynch as the grand master of
       contemporary surrealism might be pleased to make the
       acquaintance of the Czech filmmaker Jan Svankmajer, one of
       cinema's greatest fantasists. Svankmajer's newest
       over-the-brink creation is CONSPIRATORS OF PLEASURE, the
       absorbing story of an obsessive handful of hardcore sexual
       fetishists whose lives intersect and dance around one other
       in serendipitous fashion.
       Please don't get me wrong. CONSPIRATORS OF PLEASURE is an
       erotic film, although not in the ways that we usually think
       of eroticism on film. That is, while sexuality is the film's
       subject, the titillation factor here is low. For the most
       part, the characters remain fully clothed throughout.
       Importantly, there is no sexual intercourse, per se. Nobody
       talks dirty, because there's no dialogue at all. Like
       pornography, communication here is almost completely
       nonverbal. What's most gratifying to these motley sensualists
       -- even the married couple, who pursue their own desires
       separately -- is self-gratification. The film itself begins
       methodically, cross-cutting from story to story and growing
       ever more complicated as each minute passes. Finally, it
       achieves its own sort of orgasm, as the stories cross and
       interconnect, reaching a delirious climax and then a comedown
       -- a disturbing resolution in the best surrealist tradition.
       Svankmajer is best known as an animator, and has some 26
       short films and three features to his credit. I've found
       Svankmajer's short films to be consistently brilliant, at
       least the ones I've seen. His feature debut was the
       flagrantly bizarre ALICE. A version of Lewis Carroll's ALICE
       IN WONDERLAND, it remains a fine introduction to his work,
       and is one of the few Svankmajer films on video. The white
       rabbit is a real (dead) rabbit, a fussbudget stuffed with
       sawdust and animated in stop-motion. Alice is chased through
       a grotesque dreamworld by freakish stop-action puppets of
       Svankmajer's creation -- birds with skull heads, a bullfrog
       with a cow's tongue, skeletal fish with legs. (This sort of
       postmortem craftsmanship -- the cinematic reanimation of
       once-living creatures -- is a hallmark of a particular branch
       of avant garde filmmaking.) Only during the final reel, as
       Alice is tried by a cut-out King and Queen of Hearts, does
       the pace of Svankmajer's invention flag.
       So I was a little concerned about how well CONSPIRATORS would
       hold up over the course of its 87 minutes. I needn't have
       worried. The big revelation is how confident and masterful a
       director of live action Svankmajer really is. From its
       opening scene, when a fellow named Peony (Peter Meissel)
       trades self-implicating glances with a newsstand owner named
       Kula (Jiri Labus) before purchasing an issue of Hustler,
       CONSPIRATORS OF PLEASURE is entirely engrossing. The
       narrative diverges then and there -- as soon as Peony leaves
       the shop, the equally self-conscious Kula is seen to be
       messing about behind the counter with electronics. Wonder
       why? All in due time.
       We will soon meet Peony's mail carrier (Barbora Hrzanova),
       who bides her time tearing off chunks from a loaf of bread
       and rolling them into little balls. We'll meet Peony's
       neighbor from across the hall (Gabriela Wilhelmova), a rotund
       woman who will turn out to be the object of Peony's
       obsessions. (Eventually, we'll learn that she has her own
       skeleton, so to speak, in the closet.) We're also introduced
       to Mrs. Beltinska (Anna Wetlinska), who anchors the nightly
       news -- to Kula's delight. Her husband (Pavel Novy), with
       whom she barely seems to have contact, is meanwhile
       constructing his own strange devices, driving nails into
       rolling pins and furtively snipping bits off of furs worn by
       strangers.
       Have I forgotten anyone? I don't think so. All of these
       characters will make their way about Prague, occasionally
       bumping into one another, all the while absorbed in the
       elaborate convolutions of their strange fantasies. And what a
       culmination -- for what must be the film's latter third,
       Svankmajer dashes headlong into the task he's set for
       himself. With no small measures of craft and imagination, the
       film is transformed into a wild, metaphorical and literal
       depiction of sexual agitation and release. It's here that
       Svankmajer's formidable talents as an animator are finally
       showcased, to powerful effect.
       So what, you may wonder, does all this finally mean? Well, in
       the best surrealist tradition, that's sort of open to debate.
       Ideally, you have to see the movie and figure it out for
       yourself. I'd venture that it's a sly commentary on the
       sublimation of desire, on the monotony of everyday life and
       the flaring of eroticism (in the strangest places). It's a
       story about sexual deviance in eastern Europe, and by
       extension it's an allegory about life and individuality under
       trying circumstances. It also seems to be a bit of a
       cautionary tale, suggesting dire consequences when desire is
       bottled up and pleasure driven underground. But you don't
       have to look at it that way, and you may not. No matter -- if
       you've a taste for the bizarre, you'll find Svankmajer's
       unbridled imagination to be its own reward, and CONSPIRATORS
       OF PLEASURE is almost certainly unlike anything else you'll
       see this year.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Jan Svankmajer
       Starring Barbora Hrzanova, Jiri Labus, Peter Meissel, Pavel
       Novy, Anna Wetlinska, and Gabriela Wilhelmova
       Czech Republic, 1996

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT does for sex magazine publishers
more or less what ED WOOD did for bad filmmakers.
That is to say, it's a whitewash. But what a charming
whitewash, and for what a good cause. THE PEOPLE VS.
LARRY FLYNT is an epic American saga, the tale of a young
entrepreneur (er, strip club owner) who starts his own
publishing venture (er, Hustler magazine) to forge a place in
American discourse for his own home-spum philosophy (his
principal contribution to the visual grammar of pornography
seems to have been the "beaver shot"). The theatrical trailer
promotes this one as a drama, and the newest TV spots present
it as a comedy, and they're both right. Much of LARRY FLYNT
has a cheerily surreal bent to it, which actually enhances
the impact of the stuff that's played straight. It's far from
the last word on free speech and dirty magazines, but LARRY
FLYNT scores points for engaging the issues in the first
place.
After an odd, mannered prologue showing young Larry's
beginnings as a Kentucky hillbilly, the movie concentrates on
his rise from Ohio strip-club owner to Los Angeles publishing
magnate. He begins publishing the Hustler newsletter to
promote his clubs, and stakes all his savings on turning the
modest handout into a nationally distributed magazine. The
first issue tanks disgracefully, but just when all seems
lost, Flynt comes into possession of nude snapshots of Jackie
Onassis sunning herself on a Mediterranean vacation. Sales go
through the roof, and Hustler becomes an American
institution.
The movie has conflict -- Flynt's efforts run afoul of local
authorities, and he will eventually wind up in the Supreme
Court, appealing a lower court's judgment against him for
publishing a satirical ad suggesting that Jerry Falwell had
sex with his mother. The movie has romance -- Flynt falls in
love with the grungy-gorgeous Althea Leasure, a new face in
his club who turns out to be a more savvy publisher than
Flynt himself. And it has tragedy -- overzealous prosecuting
attorneys drag Flynt through the judicial mud, a
fundamentalist sniper puts him in a wheelchair for the rest
of his days, and his lovely Althea turns out to be a diseased
junkie, unable to kick the same painkillers that eased
Flynt's unbearable paralysis.
Terrific performances, sharp direction, and broad comedy --
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT has everything except a 
sense of why Flynt has been so reviled, and what drove him on in the
face of revulsion. As played by Woody Harrelson, Flynt is no
traditional hero, but he's not really an object of scorn,
either. When he explains that a Hustler front-cover image of
a woman's naked body being fed through a meat grinder --
probably the most effective image ever co-opted by the
anti-porn movement -- is meant as a symbol of his born-again
sensitivities (he was briefly converted after having dinner
with then-President Jimmy Carter's sister, Ruth Carter
Stapleton), it's hard to tell whether the movie is taking him
at his word or if it's just unwilling to call its protagonist
on the carpet for using misogyny to sell magazines.
It's easy to take a perverse delight in watching Flynt wheel
around the bedroom of his Bel-Air mansion, watching on
security cameras as federal marshals swarm the building after
he releases a videotape of the FBI's cocaine sting operation
against John DeLorean. And no matter how lowbrow Flynt's
sense of comedy, it's hard to fault him for dragging the
beatific Falwell portrayed here (by Richard Paul) through the
mud. Even when Flynt hurls invective and vegetables at a
judge from his wheelchair, he's not much more offensive than
your crazy Grandpa (his speech impediment makes him talk like
Jimmy Stewart). Only in one scene, where Flynt delivers a
sermon of sorts in front of a giant screen montage
alternating naked girls with wartime atrocities, does the
film really suggest that he may be as looney as the opposing
forces.
Courtney Love is marvelous. In the film's early scenes, she
plays a worldy stripper who nicely balances Flynt's lack of
grace. Later, when she portrays the shambling wreck that
echoes some pointed media coverage of her own life, she
doesn't embarrass herself. Oliver Stone has described her
casting as "the great battle of this picture," but how much
riskier is it to cast Love as Flynt's wife than to cast, say,
Madonna as Eva Peron? Her haunting, girlish performance
doesn't quite deliver on the same level as her songwriting
(Hole's 1994 LIVE THROUGH THIS was an astonishing album), 
but it's a remarkable debut, and she'll likely earn the respect
of even those who can't stand her music.
Edward Norton is nearly as good in the pivotal role of Alan
Isaacman, Flynt's longtime attorney (in the movie, the
character is actually a conglomeration of different real-life
lawyers including Isaacman) who explains to the Supreme Court
-- and thus to the movie's audience -- why even lowbrow
speech deserves full Constitutional protection. Bright and
savvy to a fault, Norton almost helps us forget that he's
preaching to us in a scene that could easily have fallen flat
on its face. But after Norton articulates the argument in
response to probing questions from the justices, the court's
unanimous decision in favor of Flynt really feels like a
triumph.
Cameos by political strategist James Carville, TV journalist
Donna Hanover (who happens to be Mrs. Rudy Giuliani), a
Memphis judge, an NYU law professor, and Flynt himself (as a
Cincinatti judge) add character to this free speech circus,
which is part historical drama and part broad satire. I guess
I prefer my satire a little more narrow, since I would rather
have seen a lot less of the Jerry Falwell impersonator. And a
reference to infamous financial shyster Charles Keating would
have seemed a slyer commentary on "decent" citizenry had the
point not been hammered home with an insert of the guy's name
tag in close-up. Too often, LARRY FLYNT nudges your shoulder,
making sure you "get it."
But for the most part, Milos Forman proves himself once again
to be a skillful director who guides winning performances and
makes the most of his well-chosen material without
overpowering it -- certainly this production breaks ranks
with his previous films. More than AMADEUS or ONE FLEW 
OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, LARRY FLYNT is of a piece with 
ED WOOD, the previous film from screenwriters Scott Alexander 
and Larry Karaszewski. Both films romanticize their protagonists,
but ED WOOD clicked as Tim Burton's valentine to a
down-on-his-luck ancestor. LARRY FLYNT has no such sense of
closure. Instead, the film offers congratulations to the
First Amendment. Poets and pornographers alike, Forman wants
to say, we're all in this together.
On the one hand, the film goes to great lengths to distance
itself from Flynt's accomplishments. "I don't like what Larry
Flynt does," Isaacman tells a courtroom at one point in the
film. "I never bought Hustler, and I doubt I ever will,"
Forman says in the press kit. But on the other, the movie
never shows us what was so distasteful about the magazine.
Shots from your typical Hustler pictorial would likely earn
this movie an NC-17, but when Harrelson's Flynt breaks
taboos, it's in a playful way. In one scene, he urges a model
to spread her legs a little wider. Althea playfully suggests
sexualizing THE WIZARD OF OZ. Flynt publishes a cartoon
featuring Santa Claus sporting a gigantic erection. And so it
goes. Still, there must have been more to Hustler than that.
Flynt's whole career seems to be predicated on his feeling
that the working class deserves pornography without
pretension -- "Playboy," he anounces to a roomful of
compatriots, "is mocking you." But the film never expands on
those feelings in any meaningful way, and the early scenes
speed by without showing us enough of that feisty, subversive
spirit. "All I wanted to do was make some money and have some
fun," Flynt has said, and the movie seems willing to leave it
at that. And maybe that's the point -- whether Flynt was a
hero, a pioneer, or simply a coarse nut job, whether there
were any principles at all behind his endeavors, he's one of
the people who's helped make this country great.

Title
Review for Trigger Effect, The (1996)
It's a terrific idea for a movie. Kyle MacLachlan and Elisabeth Shue 
play Matt and Annie, an unremarkable couple raising a baby and 
renovating their house in the Los Angeles suburbs. Matt's a 
fundamentally decent fellow, albeit stuffy and insecure. Annie is that 
wonderful combination of motherly grace and sexual brushfire, but she's 
unappreciated by her husband, who's consumed mostly with himself. Into 
this stable but stale relationship trips Joe (Dermot Mulroney), Matt and 
Annie's down-to-earth friend with a distinctly rough-hewn charisma. 
Naturally, Joe represents everything that's missing from Annie's life, 
and winds up shooting some trouble for the couple and getting under 
Matt's skin.
I'm sorry -- that's not a terrific idea for a movie, although it's not a 
bad one. The catalyst here, the brilliant conceit that makes events 
move, is that old dramatic standby, the blackout. The lights of L.A. are 
knocked out, not by your run-of-the-mill power failure, but by some 
relative cataclysm that takes out power in a handful of western states 
and simultaneously scrambles the telephone lines. The neighborhood 
becomes something reminiscent of a war zone, with human kindness in as 
short supply as batteries and gasoline. Neighbors stalk through their 
front yards carrying flashlights and guns, and the community gathers for 
strategy meetings.
Writer and first-time director David Koepp (his writing credits include 
Jurassic Park and Mission: Impossible) relies on mood, atmosphere, and 
thoughtful plotting to make the sense of widespread fear and desperation 
palpable, since he's got no budget to speak of. (Independence Day, which 
was throbbing loudly in the theater next door, is nowhere near as good 
at setting a mood of panic.) From the very first scenes, you can tell 
that Koepp's not in complete control of his material; the performances 
seem forced, as though the characters are marking time waiting for 
something to happen.
But before long, it starts working. The narrative is made up of steadily 
mouting challenges to Matt's competence as a lover, a parent, and a 
husband (that is, his very manhood) -- when his child falls ill, he must 
figure out how to get his hands on amoxicillin; strapped for cash, he 
has to negotiate to buy a gun. Those challenges are personified in Joe, 
who visits to help hold down the fort, and gets to know Annie a little 
too well for Matt's taste. Annie, meanwhile, is a shameless flirt, at 
least with the lights out. Shue's open sensuality is perhaps the best 
thing about the movie; even if her character seems drawn mainly from her 
own award-winning turn in last year's Leaving Las Vegas, she's an 
absolute pleasure. Mulroney isn't quite as natural, but the movie starts 
to pick up speed as soon as he comes on screen. For one thing, his nuts-
and-bolts presence is a welcome relief from MacLachlan's one-note 
performance.
Years after being used to such good effect by David Lynch (in Blue 
Velvet and Twin Peaks), MacLachlan seems to have settled into a new 
groove, playing charmless characters (c.f. last year's execrable 
Showgirls). MacLachlan's Matt is the kind of petulant bonehead who gives 
the suburbs a bad name. The script never quite shows what makes him 
tick, but the way MacLachlan plays the role, he surely thinks he's 
entitled to something -- in this respect, The Trigger Effect echoes 
nothing so much as Falling Down, in which Michael Douglas played The 
White Guy Who Couldn't Take It Anymore. (The Trigger Effect also shares 
some of Falling Down's weird racial subtext, twice pitting the white guy 
versus the ethnic other.) It's a miscalculation that distances the 
audience from Matt's dilemma.
Even so, Koepp is a skillfull craftsman, and The Trigger Effect is a 
surprisingly taut thriller in spite of its flaws -- until it takes a 
horribly wrong turn. At about the two-thirds mark, the trio make a 
decision to hit the road and drive until they reach a family member's 
home in Colorado. Before long, there's a confrontation on the road, and 
events are thrown topsy-turvy as Koepp makes a clumsy grab at deeper 
meaning. (One of the end credits helpfully points out that the story is 
inspired by the old PBS TV series Connections, one episode of which 
looked at the impact of a similar blackout in the Northeast.) In the 
process, the triangle that gives the movie its structure is completely 
dismantled in favor of a sharper focus on Matt. It's unexpected, sure, 
but it's here that the movie loses its bearings, and its laborious 
proceedings become too much to swallow.
The final straw? Well, you'd expect Matt to have learned something from 
his own stupid decisions, but his role in the hysterical, highly 
improbable climax makes you wish somebody would shoot him just to stop 
his shouting. What a comedown. Wish Koepp better luck with his next 
effort.

Title
Review for Heavenly Creatures (1994)
     Two teenage girls sit outside their school building, comparing
childhood memories.  The one, Juliet, admits gleefully, "I have scars
on my lungs!"  Turns out she spent all too much of those early years in
a sick bed, fighting off infection.  The other, Pauline, lifts her
skirt and drops her stocking to display a scar that runs the length of
her lower leg.  Doctors spent an eternity trying to excise something
unclean from that young leg.  As Pauline goes all weepy recalling the
specifics, Juliet comforts her: "All the best people have bad chests
and bone diseases.  It's frightfully romantic."
     Of course, they're friends in a Peter Jackson movie, so you may
suspect there's something sinister going on. "In the 1950s, Pauline
Parker and Juliet Hulme were branded as possibly the most evil people
on earth," Jackson says in the press materials for HEAVENLY CREATURES,
which is based on the real-life diaries of Parker and the independent
research of Jackson and co-writer Frances Walsh. "What they had done
seemed without rational explanation."
     Let's say the new film is a "departure" from the director's
earlier work, which included the lowbrow comedy BAD TASTE, the wildly
scatological Muppet massacre called MEET THE FEEBLES, and the exuberant
zombie masterpiece BRAINDEAD (known in the U.S. as DEAD ALIVE).  Even
so, you *know* you're watching a Peter Jackson movie.  The delicately
grotesque caricatures, the skewed puritanism of 1954 New Zealand, and
the stifling strictures of family life were all in evidence in
BRAINDEAD, though one could hardly have imagined that Jackson could
make his visions palatable for a general art house crowd.  But that's
what he's done here--and it's absolutely brilliant, one of the finest
films of 1994.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is really the story of Pauline (Melanie
Lynskey), a quiet schoolgirl of 14 who lacks friends but possesses a
sharp and wild imagination.  She quickly falls into friendship with a
new student, the brash and fanciful Juliet (Kate Winslet).  The two of
them easily forge a relationship where they depend on each other for
the magic that is clearly missing from their lives.  Pauline watches
happily as Juliet corrects her teacher's French grammar, and kisses a
stranger outside a movie theater.  They share an affinity for "the
world's greatest tenor," Mario Lanza.  They share a certain horror at
the sight of Orson Welles.  They spin endless tales tracing the lineage
of an imaginary royal family, and sculpt clay figures to represent the
nobles of their fantasies.  In one scene, the two of them dance around
the New Zealand countryside in their underwear, finally collapsing on
the ground, exhausted from their own enthusiasms.
     The relationship only becomes stronger from there, as the two
discover a passage into what Juliet calls "the fourth world," a
Gilliamesque fantasia of immaculate landscapes where their clay
characters come to life and dance, copulate, and mete out justice to
some of the authority figures populating Pauline and Juliet's world.
(Pauline's diary entry explains to us that the two can perceive the
fourth world only by using an obscure portion of their brains that
"about 10 people" possess.) As the two bond through their fantasies,
their relationship becomes more and more intense (to the exclusion of
the rest of the world) and erotic (to the chagrin and embarrassment of
Pauline's parents).  The tension rises as their friendship is
threatened, and Pauline begins to go out of her mind with grief at the
thought of losing her best and only friend.
     The performances, which border on the farcical, go a long way
toward the success of this story.  Jackson has always had a talent for
coaxing actors to play to the cheap seats while still keeping their
essential humanity about them, which is the key to making sure
audiences care about the human beings as horrible things happen.
Although certain scenes in this film cross the line into the grotesque,
they are made more powerful by the restraint and quiet beauty in
evidence.  HEAVENLY CREATURES is antithetical in many ways to the
theory which drove Jackson's earlier films--break the taboos,
everything in excess, too much is not enough.  Jackson achieved
catharsis by refusing to observe any boundaries in his seemingly
out-of-control films.  But BRAINDEAD, written by Jackson, Walsh, and
Stephen Sinclair, certainly took pains drawing its characters, and the
last half of that very gory film works as a very black metaphor for
young Lionel's difficulties dealing with Mum, Uncle Les, and the rest
of his frightening family.  And even MEET THE FEEBLES devoted a
tremendous amount of expository time to something very much like
character development (on the other hand, it also devoted a lot of time
to showing Muppets being blasted into clouds of blood by machine
guns).
     At this point in his career, you really have to admire Jackson's
relationship with cinema.  Having exhausted the possibilities of the
gross-out, he has turned his energies to something more delicate, and
more affecting.  This kind of film is a highwire act--if it's not
constructed perfectly, the results are disastrous.  The story needs a
wholly remarkable and absolutely believable friendship at its core, the
kind you can believe supersedes all other human concerns.  Jackson
delivers, offering up characters who feel the same glee at thumbing
their noses at society that the director must have felt as he made
those early, low-budget affronts to good taste.  At the same time, the
film's structure demands rational and beautiful segues from the real
world into fantasia, a ballet of sensibilities that Jackson pulls off
without a misstep.  He has created a dark and transcendent love story,
a graceful and complicated interweaving of innocence and obsession that
begs our sympathy and compels us to understand the beautiful motives
that can underly the most dreadful of human schemes.

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
       One of the most anticipated films of the year (by me, anyway)
       turns out to be a big, beautiful dud. A must-see for sheer
       visual splendor, Sleepy Hollow is nonetheless a fundamentally
       unsatisfying whodunnit that saddles its towering imagery with
       a tortured story that works so hard at misdirection that it
       never realizes what it's good at.
       Johnny Depp plays Ichabod Crane, who in this version of the
       classic tale is a New York policeman sent to the picturesque
       village of Sleepy Hollow, two days' journey up the Hudson
       River, where a number of locals have been reported beheaded.
       Lore has it that a beheaded Hessian horseman who was
       notoriously vicious in life has returned from the dead,
       galloping through the woods under cover of darkness and
       decapitating hapless villagers. Crane has arrived with every
       intention of dispelling this sort of foolish superstition. By
       the time he leaves, he has learned to believe.
       It's too bad Burton isn't much of an action director. Sure,
       he's big on spectacle, but when it comes time to choreograph
       a big showpiece fistfight or chase scene for the camera, he
       can't quite invest it with the requisite sense of
       physicality. (This is one reason why the first Batman movie
       puts me to sleep.) This gives most of the beheadings that
       take place in Sleepy Hollow a detached quality -- they are
       almost certainly meant to be tongue-in-cheek, but I'd like
       them to be a little more lively. The marketing campaign
       (tagline: "Heads will roll") promised some chaotic wickedness
       along the lines of Burton's previous Mars Attacks!, a
       sensibility that is, to some extent, in evidence; still,
       while the scenes are technically impressive, they remain
       strangely uninvolving. (You'd think a stylist like Burton
       would be above the kind of shameless computer-animated
       ooga-booga that's used for a cheap shock in one scene, but
       you'd be wrong.)
       More on-target are the grisly aftermaths of the murders,
       which are presented with a morbidly tongue-in-cheek
       sensibility. There's a certain gothic fascination in the
       sight of Crane kneeling next to a headless corpse, examining
       the reddish-pink tissue of an open neck. It's gruesome, but
       it's a friendly gruesomeness (Burton complained that his
       movie, which is exactly the sort of thing that healthy
       13-year-old boys live for, was saddled with a restrictive R
       rating, rather than a PG-13, and he does have a point).
       In counterpoint to these almost elegant visuals, the
       screenplay, by Andrew Kevin Walker (Se7en, 8MM) is just too
       busy. Abandoning the premise of the original Washington
       Irving story, which posited the Headless Horseman as a morbid
       hoax perpetrated on gullible villagers, Walker positions the
       Horseman as a strictly supernatural phenomenon -- a fine
       idea, in itself. The dialogue is pleasantly stylized, but the
       story is hopelessly overwritten, drawing our attention away
       from the vengeful galloping ghost who's the film's
       centerpiece and into the banal convolutions of village life.
       It only gets worse as the tale goes on. Not only must we buy
       into some piffle about the horseman being controlled by one
       of the townspeople, but we're expected to care about their
       petty schemings and power plays, all this while there's a
       back-from-the-grave villain running around who's frankly much
       more interesting than any of them.
       That the screenplay is so bloated with unnecessary
       contrivance is a particular shame in light of the various
       wonders that Burton and Co. have worked elsewhere. In terms
       of visuals, this picture is perhaps the most sure-footed of
       the year. It's photographed in shades of blue and slate-grey,
       with a bloody garnish the color of cherry pie. Johnny Depp
       appears as pale and frightened as the little boys who figure
       into the movie's backstory, and kudos are certainly due for
       the casting of an uncredited Christopher Walken as a
       distorted, silver-teethed rhyme to Depp's fragile
       handsomeness. Christina Ricci is even more delicate here than
       Depp, her round-eyed and childlike china-doll demeanor
       married to a potent yet unassuming sensuality. Late in the
       film, with her head pulled back and her throat in peril,
       we're convinced that something beautiful is in horrible
       danger. Sleepy Hollow could have done well with a rewrite
       that relied more on moments of such innate drama, and less on
       narrative convolution.
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.85:1
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Kids (1995)
     With his debut feature, Larry Clark has made an unpleasant film
about a few repulsive characters who lead a fairly irredeemable
existence.  Premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in Utah, it
provoked a hailstorm of accolades from critics who latched onto its
uncompromising style and raw vision of (mostly) white urban American
youth.  Even the film's rating created a ruckus, with Disney subsidiary
Miramax first appealing the obviously unavoidable NC-17 and then
creating a new company (Shining Excalibur) to release it unrated.  The
hype machine has turned the movie's release into something of an event,
daring audiences to come stare into the abyss that is young America.
Unfortunately, while the flick itself lives up to its billing, it
doesn't deliver much else.
     The story is pretty thin.  Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) is an obnoxious
kid who brags about his knack for seducing virgins (we see him having
sex with one in the movie's very first scene).  Casper (Justin Pierce)
is his pal, slightly more sympathetic because he's something of a
straight man to Telly's obscene vocal meanderings.  Jennie (Chloe
Sevigny) is one of the girls Telly has deflowered, and when she tests
HIV-positive, she sets off across New York City on a quest to catch
Telly--the only sexual partner she's ever had--before he screws again.
     Not that we're given the impression that Telly would stop having
sex, or even start wearing a condom, if he knew he had the AIDS virus.
At one point, he remarks in voice-over that sex means everything to
him, and his worldview is so nihilistic that concern for someone else's
life is probably beyond him.  In fact, KIDS reminded me of another
relentlessly despairing New York cult film, LIQUID SKY.  In that movie,
a character is bemused and pleased by her ability to kill people by
having sex with them, and it follows that Telly might get a similar
macho thrill out of having a secret weapon at his disposal.
     Another movie KIDS bears a passing resemblance to is A
CLOCKWORK ORANGE, where Alex and his "droogs" get hopped up at the
Korova milk bar and then go out looking for a fight.  That movie
shocked audiences with jubilant scenes of violence and then posed
questions about whether or not Alex could be reformed by the state.
But there is no state in KIDS.  The police aren't a concern, and the
parents are absent or ineffectual.  This state of mind regenerates
itself in a tight cycle, as we see the younger counterparts of these
kids hanging out at the same parties, experimenting with drugs and
trying their best to talk tough.
     The centerpiece of KIDS is a scene in Washington Square park,
where a rowdy gang of skateboarders, including Telly and Casper, taunt
first a gay couple and then a man whom they proceed to beat within an
inch of his life.  That's the moment where the characters lose our
sympathy completely, and we realize how much damage stands to be done
by these loser kids.  And then there's a great scene right after it
where the kids strip down and go swimming in the middle of the night,
showing themselves off to each other (a pair of girls along for the
ride kiss just to make the boys crazy).  It's the closest thing to an
innocent good time these characters have, even though Telly is scheming
on his next conquest through it all.
     As a realistic portrait of those bleak teenage years, I guess
KIDS should get high marks.  The music is just right.  The actors, who
aren't professionally trained, do a great job inhabiting their roles,
and Harmony Korine's screenplay goes a long way toward creating this
film's naturalistic feel.  KIDS is mostly well-directed, even though
some shots go on forever, striving for realism but instead dulling the
senses with pseudo-documentary stylistics.  Jennie is the closest thing
we have to a sympathetic character, and even she is violated in the
neat-but-predictable denouement.
     Critical reaction to the film has been almost worshipful, and
as best I can figure out, that's for two reasons.  One is that the film
is supposedly a "wake-up call," and I guess it serves that purpose for
folks who haven't yet figured out that this world is populated more and
more by selfish, disenfranchised youth who get their kicks from drugs,
sex, and casual cruelty.  The other is that the film is a contemporary
tragedy, telling the story of young people with no direction, no
family, and nothing to look forward to.  It's admirable that the film
avoids moralizing, and that it is frank, brutal, and honest.  I'd like
to see it spur serious debate about the plight of young people in our
society.  But KIDS remains more satisfying as an event than as a
movie.  We barely feel for these kids, and that's a big part of why
this movie seems nearly as empty as the lives it depicts.  That might
be exactly the intention here, but I'd argue that makes for
questionable drama, and mediocre movies.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     Give Warner Brothers credit.  With Joel Schumacher in charge of
BATMAN FOREVER, the company has finally made its biggest asset truly
safe for mass consumption.
     Yes, yes, everybody knows that Tim Burton is brilliant and all,
but wasn't BATMAN RETURNS just a little on the weird side?  Weren't the
movies a little too bleak for wholesome entertainment?  And hasn't it
become common wisdom that those first two Batman adventures were long
on style and short on *story*?
     Well, maybe.  While Tim Burton has built a cult reputation on the
strength of his idiosyncratic filmmaking, it seemed a little odd that
this would be the fellow chosen to finesse a blockbuster out of the
Batman franchise.  Studio execs must have been overly charmed by his
colorful production of BEETLEJUICE, and no doubt pawed eagerly through
copies of Frank Miller comics when Burton suggested a "darker" version
of Batman.  Michael Keaton and Jack Nicholson signed on, guaranteeing a
big fat hit.  When sequel time rolled around, Burton's vision became
even more surreal, riddled with non sequiters and fetishistic visuals
that raked in less dough even as, one suspects, it alienated a good
portion of its audience.
     Mind you, Batman put me to sleep.  Twice.  The second movie was
a marked improvement, mainly because it so eloquently demonstrated that
Burton was a man who loved and understood cinema, even if he couldn't
quite get it to do what he wanted it to.  But I'd love it if someone
could explain to me exactly why the guy who directed THE CLIENT,
FALLING DOWN, and FLATLINERS was tapped to take over a wild, surreal
series of action movies.
     'Biff, pow,' Batman.  Schumacher directs the whole thing up
close, like he's doing some kind of TV movie.  When individual body
parts are filling the screen, and the cuts are so quick that one motion
is indistinguishable from another and nearly every shot has been
spliced into the next before we can even focus, I suppose we're
supposed to rub our eyes and just say 'gosh.' I wouldn't be surprised
if this plays better on video, but that's not really the point.
     It's not all bad.  The story, for instance is actually an
improvement on the original films.  From the first introductory
sequence, the movie moves like a greased pig.  We get to see Robin,
whose character is woven into Batman's life.  At last, something more
than lip service is paid to the twisted psychology of Batman, and it
actually affects how the movie turns out.  And who would have expected
Nicole Kidman as Chase Meridian to do anything besides stand around and
drip sex? More than just window dressing, the love interest catalyzes
Batman's examination of the two sides of himself.  In fact, this movie
goes all the way back to the beginning -- we have to see Bruce Wayne's
parents get killed again, we watch the kid fall into the bat cave, we
get the same old spiel about his obsessions.  It's a little trite, but
it keeps the far more colorful supervillians from stealing the show
completely (as they did in the Burton films) and cements our
identification with the hero, which is crucial to our enjoyment of this
one.
     Chris O'Donnell is well-cast in a role that plays against Val
Kilmer's too-cool crusader.  Maybe the reason we never saw much of what
made Michael Keaton's character tick was that he had no one besides
blank wall Kim Basinger to explain himself to.  Kilmer is better at
playing the part, even if he hardly seems old enough to be any kind of
mentor to O'Donnell.  And if Jim Carrey's histrionics are welcome
anywhere, they're welcome here.  For the first time, a comic book
character has been translated absolutely intact to the silver screen.
     The visual design is hit and miss.  The costumes are terrific,
and the retooled Batmobile is still very much the Batmobile.  But the
new Gotham City is less a locale for the movie than it is simply a
backdrop for the proceedings.  And the special effects, on the whole,
have the unfortunate effect of defusing some of the more spectacular
sequences by reminding us that we're simply watching some well-executed
but obviously computer-generated special effects.  And while the sound
is excellent, the orchestral score (ersatz Elfman) is not.
     But there's nothing sublime or even subtle about any of this.
No surprises, no mysteries, no moments out of time that fill us with
awe or wonder.  The best that can be said is that the movie does what
it sets out to do very well.  In contrast, Burton's reach seems always
to exceed his grasp (the notable exception is his most perfect movie,
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  When Burton was directing the films, you knew
that the pictures on-screen were the stuff of legend, even if the sum of
the parts was actually greater than the whole.  But with Schumacher at
the helm, the adventurousness of the filmmaking itself has
disappeared.  It's hard to pinpoint what's missing, but Batman has
suddenly become completely safe, a cuddly part of the corporate
culture.  He may be packing them in at the multiplex like no one else,
but when I start checking the Gotham City skyline for McDonald's arches
(you've seen the commercials, haven't you?) I know the magic is gone.

Title
Review for Portrait of a Lady, The (1996)
I should first mention that I've never read the Henry James
novel on which Jane Campion's version of THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is
based. I should further confess that I never cared at all for
THE PIANO, Campion's 1993 study of a similarly hapless
character. And so it was that, having absorbed a handful of
rousing critical hosannahs (from Amy Taubin, Sheila Benson,
Film Comment's Kathleen Murphy, and Sight and Sound's Lizzie
Francke), I made a reluctant opening weekend pilgrimage to
the theater, propped my eyelids open with toothpicks, and
tried my best not to slouch in my seat. I found my efforts
rewarded -- paced at the bare threshold of monotony, THE
PORTRAIT OF A LADY certainly demands rapt attention, although
viewers' response to the picture seems to vary wildly. Once I
had made it through to the very end, I had decided it was at
least a moving experience if a languorous one.
That was more than three weeks ago, and I've been fighting
off a nasty virus with a New York attitude ever since. But
now that I'm finally sitting down to write, I'm surprised at
how quickly the essence of Isabel Archer comes rushing back
at me. If you do choose to give two-and-a-half hours of
scrutiny to this carefully drawn character study, you may
want to avoid thinking too much about the movie when it's
over and consider it instead a long-term investment. Weeks or
even months later, who knows if you might not flash back on
your movie-theater memories of Isabel Archer's pale blue
eyes, Gilbert Osmond's affected disdain for "dingy people,"
or the romantic notions of the giggling teenagers who open
the film, a cautionary bridge between past and present.
THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY is the story of Isabel (Nicole
Kidman), a beautiful American abroad who seems to have her
choice of eligible bachelors. As the film opens, she's
baffling friends and family by declining the marriage
proposal of the rich Lord Warburton (Richard Grant) and
rebuking the advances of Caspar Goodwood (Viggo Mortenson),
who has followed her from New York. Her sickly cousin Ralph
(Martin Donovan), himself more than a little enamored of her,
is looking forward to seeing where her willful independence
will lead her. And when her uncle (John Gielgud, briefly)
dies and wills her a sizable fortune, it looks as though the
entire world is spread out before her.
Despite her intentions, Isabel's fine life is derailed by
Osmond (John Malkovich), who schemes after her newly acquired
fortune. Isabel is introduced to Osmond by Madame Merle
(Barbara Hershey), who we come to suspect has her own reasons
for luring Isabel into his lair. Believing the rather sour
Osmond to be a man driven by his lofty tastes and refined
sensibilities, Isabel becomes engaged to him against the
warnings and protestations of Ralph, who contends that Osmond
just wants Isabel's money. As it turns out, Osmond wants more
than her money. He's a self-important sadist who wants to
control her and to own her, to add her to his expansive hoard
of arty trinkets. What ensues is a sort of psychological
horror story, as Isabel slowly comes to bear the crushing
weight of her decisions.
As the woman who gets Isabel into this mess, Hershey is fine,
but there's a striving intensity to her performance that
constantly reminds you that it's just that -- a performance.
Malkovich, meanwhile, plays to the cheap seats as Isabel's
seducer and obvious adversary (is anyone else constantly
reminded that Malkovich and Malevolence share so many letters
in common?). His casting has come under some criticism, but
there's a delicious (if inappropriate) melodrama inherent in
the scenes where he and Hershey play off one another that
adds a little vinegar to the proceedings. The supporting
players are uniformly fine, with the exception of Mary-Louise
Parker as Isabel's journalist friend. The less said the
better, perhaps, though *shrill* isn't quite the right word and
*irritating* doesn't begin to cover the bases. So poorly does
she reflect on Campion's direction that I thought I'd have to
leave the theater.
Some critics have held that Isabel is at best inscrutable and
at worst unappealing as the object of all this attention
(from her suitors as well as from the audience), but
Campion's film has to be approached as a study of interiors,
not of exteriors. A fantasy sequence near the film's
beginning where Isabel imagines making love with three
different men helps establish the film largely as Isabel's
subjective experience, not as the story told by some
omniscient narrator on whose head falls the burden of proof.
Fortunately, Kidman's performance invited me right inside the
lady's head, where I simply felt her motivations rather than
deducing them. As misguided as her decisions are, they make
emotional sense in terms of her well-meaning determination to
give her life over to only the most extraordinary of men.
When she falls for Malkovich's cruel, pseudointellectual snow
job of a courtship, it's tragic but in keeping with a
character who's trying far too hard to do the right thing at
the expense of her mortal soul.
It's worth noting that the audience -- an upscale Manhattan
crowd, supposedly the perfect demographic for a new Campion
outing -- had far less patience with all this business than I
did. The restlessness in the auditorium was palpable, and
every so often a heavy sigh -- or, worse, a giggle -- drifted
through the air. Campion's least effective when she's the
most self-conscious -- utilizing a statue with its stone
penis snapped off, posing Hershey in front of a gigantic
crucifix as she plays Judas, or tilting a street scene at an
awkward angle and then *rotating the damn camera on its axis.*
(Snickering is certainly a valid response.) Stuart Dryburgh's
cinematography, as insistently expressive as Wojciech Kilar's
score, keeps the picture interesting (he does snow very well,
which suits the chilly atmosphere) but, like Hershey's
performance, calls too much attention to itself.
Still, I can't deny that I walked out of the theater oddly
satisfied. Campion is a confident enough filmmaker that she
can entertain flashes of mad brilliance. Witness the
surrealistic black-and-white interlude that marks the film's
halfway point, during which Isabel meets both the Lumiere
brothers and Luis Bunuel -- Campion has her heroine dreaming
in the language of the movies, which of course didn't yet
exist. I was particularly fond of one breathtaking cut that
occurs in the sequence where Malkovich consummates his
careful seduction of Isabel -- the camera is suddenly
trucking around a curved wall inset with human bones before
finding Kidman and Malkovich again. Finally, see what you
make of the exquisite, enigmatic final shot, which snaps a
picture of Isabel at the moment she realizes that she's
finally and fatally trapped -- or that the world has, once
again, opened up before her.

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Bleu (1993)
     It's hard to defend the artiness of BLUE.  With a Kieslowski movie
(maybe with all Kieslowski movies), either you get it or you don't.  If
you get it, you're a fan.  The movie becomes a mystical, dream-like
experience.  You recall the most indulgent camera angles and close-ups
at the oddest moments of your day.  Perhaps you hum a few bars of
Zbigniew Preisner's formidable score as you drink your coffee in the
morning, or you have a nightmare about the kind of car crash that sets
this story in motion.  And when a friend doesn't appreciate the film --
in fact, they think it's a dull, pretentious throwback to the French
New Wave or somesuch -- you find yourself speechless.  It's hard to use
words to explain the cinema's moments of great beauty, and you may as
well give up before you begin.
     THREE COLORS: BLUE is the first film in Polish director
Krzysztof Kieslowski's trilogy built around the precious themes of
liberty, equality, and fraternity (the second and third films are WHITE
and RED, respectively).  The concepts correspond to the three colors of
the French flag, and the conceit is actually less a stricture than a
simple excuse for Kieslowski to make a set of movies that meditate on
love, loss, and our essential humanity.  Liberty is personified in the
newly-widowed Julie (Binoche), who survives the automobile accident
that kills her husband Patrice (a famous composer) and daughter Anna.
This sea change in her life drives her to divorce herself from familiar
people and surroundings, but she's dogged by an unwelcome artifact from
her husband's life.  His unfinished composition, Song for the
Unification of Europe, is the subject of intense interest, and although
Julie disposes of Patrice's notes for the piece (and tries to dispose
of all her own memories), it continues to insinuate itself into her
life until she confronts the music as well as her own devastated
psyche.
     It sounds very color-by-numbers, but the film is actually
anything but.  Kieslowski is a bold filmmaker, with a knack for
hypnotizing an audience.  As much as Kieslowski's THE DOUBLE LIFE OF
VERONIQUE seemed concerned with lenses, this one dwells on reflections
-- Julie's face reflected on the curve of a spoon, a doctor's face
reflected in the iris of her eye, filling the screen.  The richness of
imagery occasionally rivals that of a novel (Julie touches a sugar cube
to coffee; as we watch, the sugar turns the luminous color of her own
skin).  And Kieslowski works at capturing the essence of memory and the
passage of time.  At four moments during the film, the screen fades
completely and music swells - Patrice's unfinished piece - and then the
music cuts, and the scene fades back in at exactly the moment where it
faded out.  It's part of the mystery of the film that a viewer can have
an immediate and intuitive grasp on such an abstract device.
     Intuition, indeed, is the driving force behind Kieslowski's
films.  The relationships and imagery are drawn so intricately that the
pictures reward repeated viewing, and it's only on the second or third
time around that the whole power of one of these films really becomes
apparent.  It's easy to belittle a film like this, with its languid
pace, elliptical dialog, and propensity for introspection
(navel-gazing?).  Don't these somber sequences substitute a content New
Age-ism for any real statements in response to the questions they
pose?  Isn't Kieslowski living in a blithe, egocentric dream world? How
can we be expected to identify with the rich widow of a French composer
as she mourns her way through Paris?
     Yet through Binoche's performance and Kieslowski's guidance, we
do identify.  We feel Julie's aloneness even as we understand her
resolve to cast off her sentiment and distance herself from the
inexorable sadness.  At the end of BLUE, as Preisner's music swells up
on the soundtrack, all of the disparate characters and situations that
make up Julie's story finally come together.  Pictures recall pictures
as Julie is finally reflected in the eyes of another, and the delicate
shape of another character is traced on a video monitor, echoed in
shades of blue.  These final moments articulate character and
contradictory emotion in one crystalline, irrefutable passage of
images, absolutely wordless -- the very definition of great cinema.  If
you're asking the same questions as our director, the simple clarity of
such images provides answers enough.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
       Filmmaking itself is a bit of a game. Directors, actors,
       screenwriters, and editors play it with their audiences all
       the time. You use diversionary tactics, you pluck at
       heartstrings, you appeal to the emotion, the intellect, and
       the libido of your audience. When the movie is complete, the
       studio marketing department plays the game, as well. The
       object of the game is to get butts in theater seats. On a
       slightly more high-flown level, the object is to engage,
       stimulate, and please your audience to the extent that they
       feel gratified by the experience -- and tell their friends
       about the little game you're playing so that they can buy
       tickets, too. And the filmmakers find out whether they've won
       when the box office receipts start coming in.
       David Fincher is hardly the first director to exploit his own
       uncanny gamesmanship, but he's done it as compellingly as
       anyone since Hitchcock. Granted, his debut feature, ALIEN3,
       took a swan dive at the box office that mirrored the film's
       almost ritual sacrifice of an SF cinema icon. (Fincher says
       the film is less than he wanted it to be, and blames studio
       interference.) But who would have thought that SE7EN, an
       unremittingly pessimistic serial killer film -- in which the
       serial killer plays a self-righteously depraved game with two
       big-city detectives and wins -- would score more than $100
       million at the domestic box office, with or without Brad Pitt
       on board?
       As I write, it's hard to tell how solid a commercial hit THE
       GAME may or may not be, although the general reaction of the
       audience on opening night was one of near-euphoria, with
       laughter, gasps, and even screaming throughout and widespread
       applause at the ending credits. In fact, I hardly know where
       to start criticizing it, because the pay-off is so terrific.
       Even if you guess the film's ultimate resolution -- and I
       did, although I kept telling myself that even this screenplay
       couldn't possibly resort to such a wildly implausible device
       -- the execution and follow-through is dazzling.
       Michael Douglas, the quintessential white man in trouble,
       plays Nicholas Van Orton, a wealthy, steely, and entirely
       troubled gazillionaire. (You may recognize a little bit of
       your boss in him.) He perches atop a megacorporation
       headquartered in San Francisco, and works his employees
       ragged -- but not, he believes, unfairly or without good
       reason. He's devoted to the bottom line, and puts a sourly
       positive spin on his firing of an underperforming executive
       (Armin Mueller-Stahl) -- more time to go sailing, Van Orton
       assures him. He regards his ex-wife (Anna Katerina), who
       clearly remains worried about his soul, coldy. He lives in
       the long shadow of his father, who committed suicide by
       jumping from the roof of the family home.
       He's visited by his estranged brother, Conrad (Sean Penn),
       who offers him an unusual birthday present -- a gift
       certificate for a personalized "game" orchestrated by a
       high-tech company called Consumer Recreation Services, or CRS
       for short. "They make your life fun," he promises. Resistant
       to the idea but intrigued at the same time, Nicholas
       eventually finds himself at the CRS offices, submitting to a
       battery of psychological tests and a physical exam that will
       help the company tailor a game just for him. Soon, Nicholas
       arrives at home to find a clown dummy splayed across his
       driveway, just as his father was found. Nicholas finds a key
       in the clown's mouth, and suddenly starts receiving some very
       strange television programming.
       And so the game is afoot. The movie seems to take some cues
       from John Frankenheimer's sinister SECONDS, but without that
       film's chilly sensibility. The general mood is closer kin to
       Martin Scorsese's one-night-in-New-York farce AFTER HOURS,
       with more sinister overtones but with the same general
       trajectory. Nicholas bonds with Christine (Deborah Kara
       Unger, seen earlier this year in Crash), a
       wrong-place-at-the-wrong-time waitress who dumps drinks all
       over his expensive suit and then helps him escape after he
       finds himself, mysteriously, trespassing at CRS offices after
       hours. Lost credit cards, Swiss bank accounts, a crypt in
       Mexico and a first edition of TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD will all
       figure into the picture as the game plays itself out. Justly
       paranoid, Van Orton's task is to figure out what the hell is
       going on, and whether or not he's still just playing.
       The screenplay, by the folks who brought you THE NET (with an
       apparent polish by SE7EN screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker),
       is effective but irritatingly simplistic. It relies on
       cyber-paranoia, the suspicion that anybody with the right
       technological tools can manipulate your televisioned,
       cell-phoned world to such an extent that you can't tell
       what's "real" anymore. What's more interesting is the
       sobering suggestion, left over from SE7EN, that a human life
       is really a sort of Rube Goldberg device -- that by setting
       up the right combinations of pulleys and levers, you can
       manipulate a person into just about anything.
       With the exception of a few choice lines that are accented by
       Douglas's deliciously dry delivery, the dialogue is mostly
       banal -- which makes it more and more difficult to figure out
       just what the hell is really happening. Some skillful
       misdirection by Fincher compounds the confusion, and Unger's
       smartly reserved performance drives us to second-guess
       whether or not she's really involved in what looks more and
       more like a truly sinister scheme. Douglas is fine, exuding
       that combination of privilege and haplessness for which he's
       so well known. Penn is only on-screen for a few minutes, but
       his performance veers effectively from relative serenity to
       hysteria.
       From a technical standpoint, the film is expertly gorgeous.
       Fincher remains one of the few directors in Hollywood with a
       visual style that pushes the bounds of what we think of as
       "the movies." Van Orton's repeated flashbacks to the life and
       death of his father are presented as Super-8 home movies --
       efficiently and beautifully, the flashbacks are signalled not
       by dissolves or slow pans, but by the abrupt change in the
       quality, color, and grain of the film itself. Fincher retains
       an aesthetic fascination with photography, with what it means
       to take a picture. Cinematographer Harris Savides photographs
       an incriminating a pile of Polaroids with the same sort of
       up-close, shallow-field inserts that made up a good portion
       of the chilling opening credits to SE7EN. Jim Haygood's film
       editing is virtuosic and world class, tapping into the rhythm
       of the characters and the story instead of relying on
       MTV-style hypermontage. Compared to what's playing elsewhere
       in the multiplex, this sort of breathtaking craftsmanship
       nearly qualifies as avant garde.
       For all that, THE GAME is almost breezily entertaining. You
       can take that as a compliment, but it's also a problem. For
       too long -- about the first three-quarters of the film --
       Fincher can't manage to escalate this particular game to the
       level of tension or exhilaration achieved by the best
       Hollywood movies, say a BREAKDOWN or a FACE/OFF. Meandering
       from situation to situation, the script takes pains to remain
       absolutely ambiguous, since the climax will its depend on
       being able to jerk our perceptions this way and that. The end
       result of this is that there's no sense of revelation for the
       audience, no moment when you feel things click together just
       right -- just twist after twist. Normally, I'm not a fan of
       this school of storytelling, which seems sorta lazy to me --
       THE USUAL SUSPECTS fell back on a similar one-twist gimmick
       in 1995, and Joe Eszterhas has used it repeatedly, to my
       great irritation (JAGGED EDGE, BASIC INSTINCT, and SLIVER).
       But THE GAME is a little more playful in its convolutions
       than those films.

Title
Review for Dellamorte Dellamore (1994)
Directed by Michele Soavi
Written by Gianni Romoli (based on Tiziano Sclavi's DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE)
Cinematography by Mauro Marchetti
Music by Manuel de Sica
Starring Rupert Everett, Anna Falchi, and Francois Hadji-Lazaro
Italy (English language), 1994
U.S. Release: 1996
        Francesco Dellamorte has a bit of a problem. He's the live-in
watchman at Buffalora Cemetery in northern Italy, where the corpses are
crawling back out of their graves after spending a mere week or so in the
ground. As you can imagine, that's something of a nuisance, but if he
reports it to the authorities, he's certain of one thing -- they'll shut
down the cemetery to investigate, and Francesco will be out of a job. 
Since he can't have that happening, he keeps a loaded pistol with him,
which he carries to the door whenever he answers a knock. It's usually
just one of them coming back, and a single bullet blown solidly through
the head -- where have you gone, George Romero? -- takes a zombie down
easily enough. For a misanthrope like Francesco, it's a pretty good gig. 
        Surrounded by death, and with only the clumsy and deformed Gnaghi
for company, Francesco's life is pretty stable until he falls for a
mourning widow. Anna Falchi plays the object of his desire (known in the
credits as "She"), whom he seduces in the Buffalora Ossuary (where the
bones of the dead are deposited); the two indulge their strange affections
on her poor husband's grave.  Naturally, the old man comes back. The woman
dies in her spouse's ensuing fit of jealous violence, and Francesco is
stricken with despair.  Naturally, She comes back again. And again. 
        That's only the surface of the remarkable DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE. 
You might expect even a stylish horror director to milk these situations
for all they're worth, but Michele Soavi knows that zombie hijinks have
been done to death by such precocious directors as Sam Raimi and Peter
Jackson.  Accordingly, the movie never stops moving, twisting and turning
its way to an oddly existential climax. The scenario, written for the
screen by Gianni Romoli from a comic book scenario by Tiziano Sclavi,
concentrates on the human characters rather than the zombies, and gives as
much play to turmoil of the spirit as it does to the carnage that spills
from the body. The world of Francesco Dellamorte runs parallel to George
Romero's zombie apocalypse. Like Romero's trilogy, and quite unlike many
of its imitators, DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE is a zombie movie with character. 
        I have to wonder what American audiences are expecting on the way
into this picture, given that the normally staid October Films has created
a mild cheeseball of an ad campaign to push the film into U.S. theaters. 
"Zombies, Guns and Sex, OH MY!" reads the tagline, stripped across poster
art that may lead audiences to believe that CEMETERY MAN is actually a
cheap horror flick from the 50s or 60s. I find it hard to believe that
this campaign will actually attract a discriminating audience, but
stranger things have happened, and we'll just have to see. Rest assured
that CEMETERY MAN/DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE is a confident, creepy little
horror film with a winning sense of humor, a sure feel for outrageous
imagery, and a healthy mean streak. 
        As played by Rupert Everett (READY TO WEAR), Francesco is a misfit
and a nihilist. (The main character in the Dylan Dog comic book series
originated by Sclavi is based on Everett, and his casting here is
something of a coup.) He's also a remarkable Everyman who commands our
attention and our sympathy as he slouches toward the inevitable. Francois
Hadji Lazaro's Gnaghi is by turns irritating and pathetic. (You may have
seen Lazaro as the meanest-looking cyclops in THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.)
By the time he develops a decidedly unhealthy crush on the mayor's
daughter (and the mayor's daughter's disembodied head), Lazaro has invited
viewers to inhabit his character, and the results are unsettling. The
relationship is consummated at the end of the film, but these two are
shown early on to be classic codependents. Along those lines, the movie
exhibits a well-developed sense of humor that Goes a long way toward
eliciting the viewer's sympathy. The characters aren't very pleasant, but
you start to identify with them in spite of yourself. By the time the
movie is over, their predicament almost seems to take on mythic
proportions. 
        Herein seems to lie the problem for many American critics, who
have been less than impressed with what may be a vigorous political
allegory.  I guess I'm a little slow, but I didn't understand right away
that the Italian citizens who are zombified -- a disquietingly fascist
troupe of boy scouts, Buffalora's highest ranking incompetent bureaucrat
-- may represent the dead archetypes of Italian society come back to haunt
the living. Instead, I fell for the grisly comedy and the sharp cinematic
style, which references such influential pictures as VERTIGO and ONCE UPON
A TIME IN THE WEST (on which Soavi's progenitor Dario Argento received a
story credit). And while that bastion of genre reporting, CINEFANTASTIQUE,
had decidedly unkind words for the film's alleged misogyny, I read it
instead as a look inside poor Dellamorte's head. Francesco, as noted
above, is an equal opportunity curmudgeon, and if She is treated as the
most maddening of all the characters, it's because she is the object of
Francesco's most maddening obsessions. At the same time, I think these
critics complain a little too much. Stephen Holden, writing in THE NEW
YORK TIMES, criticized the film's decision to make Francesco impotent --
missing the important joke, which is that he's really not impotent at all,
despite the rumor around town (you have to wonder if Holden left partway
through). 
        The cemetery itself is a triumph of production design, an
inhabited world with curious nooks and crannies (the Ossuary, Gnaghi's
cellar in the watchman's house). It's also a representation of Francesco's
state of mind, and the essence of the movie rests in the ways he discovers
to break away from it. Gory and playful, darkly humorous and flippantly
bleak, Soavi's film is a joyride through a sullen state of mind. After
Francesco takes his revenge on the world outside, and sets himself to
escaping from the life he's made, DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE finally offers up
its own definition of madness. 

Title
Review for Twelve Monkeys (1995)
I've just about herniated my brain in the days since I saw TWELVE MONKEYS.
Like most other stories that dabble in time travel, it presents a cracking
conundrum having to do with the relationship of history to the future and
the feasibility of someone traveling back to the past in an attempt to
influence the formation of their own present. But unlike those other
stories, TWELVE MONKEYS is the creation of auteur Terry Gilliam, the
irrepressible fantasist in charge of the similarly temporal shenanigans of
TIME BANDITS, the urban pain and redemption of THE FISHER KING, and the
lobotomized despair of his great suffocating masterpiece, BRAZIL. 
        That means that the machinations of an uncommonly intelligent
script, sharply convoluted by the husband-and-wife screenwriting team of
David and Janet Peoples, are only part of the sheer expressive power of
this very unconventional production. While the story is more carefully
constructed than anything Gilliam has previously attempted, the film bears
the undeniable hallmarks of one of his peculiar creations, and TWELVE
MONKEYS is unique in its capacity to bring the audience into the same
frame of mind as its desperate protagonist. What I've realized is that I
simply have to see the film again, armed with a knowledge of what's going
to transpire that can help me interpret the events on screen. But time
spent deciphering the twists and turns of the plotline, pleasurable though
it may be, is strictly secondary to the film's tremendous emotional
resonance. 
        Here's what I'm sure of: In the year 1997, some five billion
people are wiped out by a deadly virus that renders the surface of the
planet uninhabitable, driving the few survivors underground. Some 30 years
hence, researchers living underneath Philadelphia have concluded that the
virus may have been deliberately introduced by an underground organization
calling itself the Army of the 12 Monkeys. Serving a life sentence,
convict James Cole (Bruce Willis) is chosen to travel back in time to
gather information about that organization in an attempt to pinpoint the
origin of the virus, which remains incurable. Cole is forced to
"volunteer" for this disorienting assignment mainly because he has an
extraordinary memory.  That memory has also wrapped itself around a
traumatic vision from Cole's childhood -- of a man being gunned down at an
airport -- that manifests itself as a recurring dream. 
        Advised that he can spy on the past, but can't tamper with fate,
Cole is first zapped back to Baltimore circa 1990, where his mission is
abruptly complicated by his immediate incarceration in an insane asylum.
Bruised, bloody, and nearly incoherent, he fits the part of a raving
madman. But while his arrival seems random (he was supposed to land in
1996), the contacts he makes are significant. He meets up with fellow
inmate Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt), a charismatic nut case who will later
be seen to play a pivotal role as the leader of a group of animal rights
activists. He also attracts the attention of psychiatrist Kathryn Railly
(Madeleine Stowe), who could swear that she's seen Cole somewhere before.
(She's right, but we won't figure out where until later.)
        It's the interaction of all these characters, as well as the
subtle ways that Cole's dream changes over the course of the movie, that
fuel the film's prevalent uncertainty about cause and effect. At one point
Cole is convinced that he himself is responsible for unleashing the virus
by suggesting that it might be a keen idea for Goines to hijack a plague
from his virologist father. At another, we're deliberately left unsure
whether Cole is responsible for a grisly killing as a key scene unfolds at
length. And just when Dr. Railly starts to believe that Cole really is
telling the truth about his mission, Cole goes rational on her, insisting
-- just as she had tried to convince him previously -- that his visions of
the future are delusionary, and that he really is just a madman in need of
her help and guidance. 
        LA JETEE, the French film on which TWELVE MONKEYS is based, is a
science fiction story, the most famous work (and the only fiction film) by
famed documentarian Chris Marker. The story is told through a succession
of still frames with voiceover narration, and in only one brief shot does
this motion picture actually move. Gilliam claims in interviews that he
has never seen LA JETEE, but there seems to be a direct reference to its
unusual style in a scene where Dr.  Railly narrates a slide show about a
delusional soldier in World War I.  And when Railly and Cole take refuge
in a movie theater that happens to be showing Alfred Hitchcock's VERTIGO
(an important influence on Marker and LA JETEE), we're forced to consider
suddenly, almost subconsciously, the many interesting ways that film is
this film's doppelganger. It may be true that it takes a passing
acquaintance with film history to truly appreciate TWELVE MONKEYS;  the
most overwhelming shot in the film may be the moment when Bernard
Herrmann's love theme from VERTIGO wells up inexplicably on the
soundtrack, at exactly the point where Cole and Railly begin their
incognito rush toward destiny. 
        Of course, the actors are instrumental in grabbing the audience's
sympathy for a tale this far removed from everyday life, and Gilliam's
performers really come through for him. Willis' Cole is a burly, tragic
Everyman, a tough guy who looks like he's too often on the verge of tears. 
We've seen Willis take a pounding in the DIE HARD films, but he's never
looked this vulnerable -- in one of the film's early scenes, his face is
battered and bloody, with a thick line of drool strung off his lower lip.
If our big-budget hero embodies the film's core humanity, heartthrob Brad
Pitt is the off-kilter comic axis. Apparently urged to run with his most
hyperactive instincts, Pitt plays Goines as an unpredictable loon who
hammers his fast-talking points home with quick, neurotic gestures (his
charm is undercut by the possibility that he will be responsible for five
billion murders). As Dr. Railly, Madeleine Stowe has comparatively little
to do, though her presence is key as the only rational observer in the
film. Balancing her reactions between incredulity and blind faith, she's
the center holding the film's increasingly disparate elements together. In
fact, in the last scene of the film, the camera holds on her face, where
it seems possible that the entire contradictory spectrum of human feeling
is in evidence. 
        Until now, character has never been Gilliam's forte, and it's no
surprise that the films from his oeuvre that deal significantly in human
transformations -- THE FISHER KING and TWELVE MONKEYS -- are the ones he
had no hand in writing. It's as though the presence of a tight script
frees him from the more obsessive demands of following his bliss. (Among
screenwriter David Peoples' previous credits are BLADE RUNNER and
UNFORGIVEN, two fatalistic films that look long and hard at the static
nature of their heroes' respective identities as probable Replicant and
once and future gunslinger.) In Gilliam's films, of course, apparent
madness is often the only escape route from brutal, demanding reality. In
similar fashion, TWELVE MONKEYS plays wicked games with notions of
madness, perspectives on reality, and its protagonist's hopes and dreams. 
        After going over the film in my head time and time again, I'm
still not sure how all of the puzzle pieces fit together, and I start to
wonder what I really saw in certain scenes. But this is not a liability,
because the up-front emotional wallop packed by TWELVE MONKEYS makes the
niggling pleasures of deciphering the script's layers and loopbacks
strictly secondary. A second viewing is definitely in order, just to put
my mind at ease. And at the very end of a year when many film fans claimed
to relish repeated viewings of THE USUAL SUSPECTS -- a movie that actually
negates itself in its final scene -- I'm pleased beyond words to find a
movie that cares deeply for its characters even as they fall under the
wheels of destiny, instead of killing them just to be clever. 

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
       I suppose an argument could be made that Toy Story is one of
       those films that didn't need a sequel. Beloved by kids and
       their parents, respected equally by mainstream America and
       geekish movie buffs, that first movie remains a landmark of
       recent history, the one that burst open the possibilities of
       computer animation and demonstrated through wild invention
       and giddy chutzpah just how complacent the Disney animation
       machine had become in cranking out fluffy razzle-dazzle
       entertainment full of formula storytelling and banal
       songwriting.
       As someone who doesn't believe sequels are necessarily a bad
       thing (granted, they usually are a bad thing, but that's
       because they're made for the wrong reasons), I had to wonder
       what in the world they were thinking. Fortunately, Disney
       claimed to have been so knocked-out by early animation tests
       that they let Pixar go full-speed ahead with a theatrical
       sequel. Lucky thing, too -- like the first movie, this one is
       a joy to behold on the big screen, and technically, it
       improves on its predecessor on just about every level. (From
       a business standpoint, the end credits show that the new
       creations are copyrighted by Pixar, while the previous film's
       elements are shared between Pixar and Disney, a sign of the
       production house's new cachet in Hollywood.)
       Visually, the main shortcoming of this fully
       computer-generated movie is that human figures are still
       rendered relatively poorly, making them look a little creepy.
       Fortunately, that eerie unreality fits in perfectly with the
       perspective of the movie, where the secret world of toys is
       more immediate, and arguably more attractive, than the world
       of the humans who surround them.
       Sheriff Woody (voiced by a note-perfect Tom Hanks), the
       longtime favorite among Andy's toys who was challenged in the
       previous go-round by the arrival of flashy-new-thing action
       figure Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen), suffers an injury early in
       the film, when Andy tugs too hard on his arm and pulls a seam
       apart, revealing the stuffing inside. This accident catalyzes
       some uneasieness among the toys, who know too well that a
       broken toy is often a forgotten toy, and a forgotten toy is
       one that loses its reason for existence.
       That this film manages to turn a box marked "25 cents" into a
       symbol of doom, or to make its screed against the retention
       of collectible toys by wrongheaded profiteers fuel for a
       metaphysical dilemma, is a testament to its skill at
       metaphor, seamlessly translating the hopes and fears of our
       real world into that of the toys. Operating on this level of
       abstraction, Toy Story 2 tackles some mighty heavy issues
       without once preaching or veering into pretentiousness. (The
       worst I can say is that Randy Newman seems to have reserved
       his sappiest lyric in years for Sarah McLachlan, who stops
       the movie cold by singing it at just about the halfway mark.)
       Sometimes I think Toy Story 2 tries too hard. There's
       somewhat less of the seat-of-the-pants loopiness that
       energized the first film, allowing it to surprise and excite
       on a near-constant basis, and more philosophizing about toys,
       collectors, the nature of happiness and the meaning of life.
       While that leads to fewer bellylaughs, it does make way for
       more elaborate humor and an uncommonly ambitious reflexivity
       that asks the toys to consider their own status as
       commodities that move in and out of fashion. (Just don't ask
       why Andy's favorite toy is based on a TV series that was
       canceled in 1957.)
       Where else in mainstream movies do you get such an awesome
       moment as the one where Buzz arrives at Al's Toy Barn to find
       it stocked to the gills with his doppelgangers, Buzz
       Lightyear action figures? Forget the self-congratulatory
       science fiction of The Matrix -- this is a fundamental
       mind-bender for Buzz, and the audience shares his humility
       and wonderment at the sight. Here, as in the roughly
       concurrent scene where Woody watches tapes of the Howdy
       Doodyish children's TV show that originated his character, we
       see our protagonists come face-to-face with God.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by John Lasseter, Colin Brady, Ash Brannon, and Lee
       Unkrich
       Written by Lasseter, Brannon, Peter Docter, Andrew Stanton,
       Rita Hsaio, Doug Chamberlain, and Chris Webb
       Cinematography by Sharon Calahan
       Starring (voices) Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, and Joan Cusack
       USA, 1999
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.85:1
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for House of Yes, The (1997)
       Playing a fetching psychopath, Parker Posey puts a serrated
       edge on the mostly innocuous THE HOUSE OF YES, a comedy of
       early-80s manners that coops up three siblings, a matriarch,
       and an outsider in the family home over Thanksgiving night
       while a storm rages outside. Posey is Jackie-O Pascal, a
       well-practiced Jacqueline Onassis fetishist who's dangerous
       when she's unmedicated. She can't be accused of good taste --
       she pays homage to the Kennedy dynasty by dolling herself up
       in a pink suit and pillbox hat, a la the more famous Jackie
       O. At a costume party, she once added a blotch of ketchup and
       a dollop of macaroni to the outfit to, um, accent the
       ensemble with mock blood and brain matter from a certain
       assassinated president.
       It's not that our Jackie-O is simply an American history buff
       with a grisly bent. Also among her issues is a longstanding
       sexual relationship with her twin brother Marty (Josh
       Hamilton), who is helpless to resist her charms. (They
       reenact the Kennedy assassination together, Marty sitting
       upright and waving vacantly.) The soaking-wet outsider is
       Leslie (Tori Spelling), whom Marty has brought home for the
       holiday to introduce as his fiance. (Daggers from Jackie's
       eyes, natch.) But before the night is over, Marty and Jackie
       will pair off to, um, discuss old times. Meanwhile, awkward
       younger brother Anthony (Freddie Prinze, Jr.) already has
       designs on Leslie. As the matronly Mrs. Pascal, Genevieve
       Bujold hovers disapprovingly over the proceedings.
       Wackiness ensues, leading up to the third-act introduction of
       a loaded gun into the housebound milieu. (If you guessed this
       was based on a stage play, you're absolutely right.) THE
       HOUSE OF YES is fitfully funny, but I can't help but think it
       missed an opportunity to be truly bizarre. Although it's been
       compared to the bold work of Noel Coward, Harold Pinter, and
       Tennessee Williams (!), it retreats too readily to the
       shelter of self-conscious absurdity. The movie saves itself
       from its own staginess by being aggressively artificial, and
       nobody is better at playing that game than Posey, who can
       imbue even the most honeyed line with the flutter of latent
       wickedness. The result is a black comedy that's oddly
       agreeable. The outrageousness is parlayed with a wink, and
       the campy performances reflect the melodrama that seems to
       infect every corner of the Pascal family's daily life. Only
       Spelling, doing an uncanny imitation of a fish out of water,
       doesn't seem to be in on the joke.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Written and directed by Mark Waters
       Based on the stage play by Wendy MacLeod
       Cinematography by Michael Spiller
       Starring Parker Posey, Josh Hamilton, Freddie Prinze Jr.,
       Tori Spelling and Genevieve Bujold
       U.S., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
     Bookended as it is by BLUE and RED, the second film in
Kieslowski's liberty/equality/fraternity trilogy is a welcome relief
from the sometimes tragic sensibility of the other two films.  WHITE is
about post-Communist Poland.  It is about the tricks that hold up our
own quests for "equality" (is there really such a thing outside of
mathematics?).  But most of all, it's a love story.
     Of course, all three of the films are love stories in a way;
but BLUE is a love story that ends as the film begins, and RED is a
love story once removed.  WHITE is a story about stubborn love, a sort
of co-dependent relationship that endures despite the best efforts of
both lovers.  Zbigniew Zamachowski plays Karol Karol, the impotent
hairdresser who is abandoned in Paris by wife Julie Delpy.  Unable to
support himself, the spurned lover eventually returns to his native
Poland, smuggling himself in inside a friend's suitcase.  Seething with
resentment, he makes a fortune in his newly capitalist homeland, and
then sets off on an elaborate plan to revenge himself on his wife.
Kieslowski makes some wry observations about the nature of capitalism
and the lust for "easy money." Karol doesn't simply want to make
himself the financial equal of his wife; he wants to become "more
equal" than she is.  That being the case, it's not enough for him
simply to make a fortune.  He wants to humiliate her, as well.
     He manages that, but the circumstances are an idiosyncratic
delight.  WHITE isn't lofty enough to avoid an occasional detour into
sober, existential territory, but the side trips add a little weight to
the story, which is at heart a marriage farce.  The sublime Zamachowski
pulls his best Chaplin routine here, and it pays off charmingly.  It's
no surprise that Delpy is radiant, and plays the ice queen well (my
favorite shot of Delpy is still her cameo in RED, where all three films
touch briefly).  In most ways, this film is the least of the trilogy --
WHITE is so conciliatory toward its audience that it threatens to float
away.  But at the end, it's anchored by a Chaplinesque moment of
revelation that justifies our attention and respect, and this film's
solid place in Kieslowski's admirable trilogy.

Title
Review for Dogme 1 - Festen (1998)
       CELEBRATION trots out that old chestnut, the "dark family
       secret," to enliven a birthday party for the 60-year-old
       patriarch of a large Danish clan. Director Thomas Vinterberg
       has signed onto the Copenhagen-based Dogme 95 collective of
       filmmakers, agreeing to a "vow of chastity" that precludes
       the use of props and constructed sets as well as any optical
       effects, special lighting, post-synchronized sound, or
       anything but handheld camerawork. The result is an edgy
       picture that's all the more impressive for what it does
       within its rigid aesthetic, but ultimately delivers less than
       it promises.
       Ulrich Thomsen is Christian, one of three adult siblings
       arriving at the party. Sister Helene and brother Michael are
       regarded by the family as somewhat less successful than
       Christian. The fourth, absent sibling is Diane, Christian's
       twin, who drowned herself in one of the house's bathtubs just
       two months previous to the gathering. Christian remains
       shattered by the loss, not least because he was the only
       family member not to receive a final telephone call or letter
       from his beloved sister. When Christian stands to make a
       speech, it's not to celebrate the family but rather to
       excoriate it, bringing some troublesome demons out of the
       past and into the harsh light of the present.
       Despite the nature of Christian's revelations -- he claims
       that, as children, both he and his sister were the unwilling
       objects of dad Helge's incestuous sexual desires -- the
       unflappable gathering is not scandalized, but merely taken
       down a notch for a moment or two. Dad denies the allegations,
       and Mom makes a point of Christian's active imagination and
       his difficulty separating fantasy from reality. Sullen and
       increasingly intoxicated, Christian plans to intensify his
       attack on the facade of normalcy that the family hides
       behind. In denial, Michael eventually responds to the
       allegations by dragging Christian out of the house
       altogether.
       Also effective is the sense that the house is haunted, not
       literally but figuratively, by the ghost of a suicide. And
       more upsetting than any of the talk about incest and suicide
       is the scene where, after Helene's black boyfriend arrives at
       the party, Michael leads the revelers in an effortless
       rendition of an old racist drinking song about a "black
       Sambo." For a few moments, Vinterberg extrapolates the
       blissful ignorance of this family to some larger
       cross-section of Scandinavian culture, and that's where the
       movie sinks its teeth in.
       Finally, I've got to say that this tactic of shooting on
       video and then transferring to film is starting to wear me
       out. Popularized by fellow Dogme signatory Lars von Trier,
       who used it to good, semi-documentary effect in BREAKING THE
       WAVES, I'm sorry to see it exalted in the supposedly
       truth-finding work of Dogme 95 filmmakers. While the effect
       can be striking, it's also distracting to see video artifacts
       blown up and exhibited on a big movie theater screen in a way
       that should be anathema to filmmakers seeking truth at 24
       frames per second. In other words: "Congratulations, Mr.
       Vinterberg. You have succeeded in making your film look more
       like television."
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Thomas Vinterberg
       Written by Vinterberg and Mogens Rukov
       Cinematography by Anthony Dod Mantle
       Edited by Valdis Oskarsdóttir
       Starring Ulrich Thomsen, Thomas Bo Larsen, and Paprika Steen
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.37:1, per Dogme 95 specs
       Denmark, 1998
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Happiness (1998)
       Proving that the spiky and affecting WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE
       was no fluke, writer/director Todd Solondz follows up with a
       harrowing comedy about pain, isolation, and dysfunction in
       New York and New Jersey. With a scope and ambition that
       serves him well, Solondz cross-cuts his narrative among the
       stories of an extended family, crafting a remarkably coherent
       story out of these increasingly disquieting vignettes. Think
       of Altman's SHORT CUTS reimagined for the East Coast, or Neil
       La Bute's YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS with less smug distance.
       The key difference between Solondz and La Bute? Compassion.
       Photographs of Solondz suggest a bespectacled geek who bears
       a close resemblance to Dawn Wiener, the girl who slogged
       through DOLLHOUSE's bleak junior high school universe. That
       persona seems to have splintered in Happiness into myriad
       character types. There's Helen Jordan (Lara Flynn Boyle), a
       black-clad poet who knocks 'em dead at readings and book
       signings, but secretly believes her work is presumptuous and
       insincere. In search of gritty experience, Helen is intrigued
       by an obscene phone call from Allen (Philip Seymour Hoffman),
       an overweight basket case who's working his way through the
       phone book, masturbating bitterly.
       Allen also rings Helen's sister Joy (Jane Adams), a
       soft-spoken songwriter who's emotionally pummelled by the
       equally needy people around her. (Pretending to be an
       acquaintance, he asks her what she's wearing and she responds
       sweetly and naively, unaware that she's being had.) The third
       sister, and the only one to have married, is Trish (Cynthia
       Stevenson), who has a husband, a home, and a family -- the
       kind of life that Helen claims to covet. The neighbor kids
       call Trish's psychiatrist husband (Dylan Baker) "Dr.
       Maplewood." Bill Maplewood seems to be a gentle,
       understanding father, but he's also a pedophile spiralling
       out of control. In a sequence that's both wryly comic and
       horrific, he slips a Mickey into a boy's tuna sandwich during
       a sleepover, the better to take advantage of him. What's most
       heartbreaking is the relationship between Bill and his son,
       who share an uncommon (and unsettling, given the context)
       candor about sex. The whole film moves inexorably toward a
       wrenching conversation between the two that once again
       crystallizes Solondz' regard for childhood as trial by fire.
       If the synopsis above sounds like it may be too much to take
       in one 134-minute sitting, be grateful I haven't described
       the separation of the Jordan sisters' parents after 40 years
       of marriage (executed with sangfroid and loneliness by Ben
       Gazzara and Louise Lasser), the Russian cab driver's game, an
       early outburst from the spurned lover played by Jon Lovitz,
       or the fate of Pedro the doorman. Despite the considerable
       downers, what's most notable about Happiness may be its
       seamless fusion of low comedy and human tragedy. Solondz
       recognizes that, no matter how bleak this life may be,
       there's also something fundamentally absurd about our
       day-to-day struggle toward "happiness," and a reassurance to
       be had in the bitter humor that accompanies unspeakable
       sorrow. Accordingly, the performances he draws from his cast
       beg us to recognize that humor without resort to mockery or
       caricature.
       Particularly crucial is Baker's finely tuned portrait of that
       most chilling incongruity, a family man and child raper. In a
       film peppered with slatternly depictions of humanity,
       allegedly sick humor, and twice as much semen as I've seen in
       any mainstream flick, the one element that led Universal
       Pictures to disown HAPPINESS (which was set to be released by
       their adventurous October Films division) was its refusal to
       imagine Maplewood as a monster. All the credit goes to
       Baker's portrayal of a man who, calmly, quietly, and with
       little apparent soul-searching, leaps into his own abyss.
       Against the odds, Solondz makes all of these bits work as a
       whole through canny scripting and characterization.
       Sometimes, it's like watching a car crash. Individual moments
       may seem cruel, mean-spirited or even deliberately "shocking"
       (in a couple of scenes, he may go too far out on the limb in
       search of one more outrageous twist), but Solondz plays fair
       with these misfits and criminals, using them as narrative
       prisms, each reflecting fragments of our own lives back at
       us.
       Having crafted two movies that take a clear-eyed, deeply felt
       gander at the dark truths undermining the sunny ideal of
       American life, Solondz is more than just another hipster
       angling for shock value. He shares with the best filmmakers a
       wit, self-assurance and off-kilter grace that enable him to
       stare down his demons decisively, even as he conjures new
       ones. Having arrived on the stagnant "indie" film scene just
       when we needed him most, Solondz takes his place among the
       most fearless and incisive directors working today.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Written and directed by Todd Solondz
       Cinematography by Maryse Alberti
       Edited by Alan Oxman
       Starring Jane Adams, Dylan Baker, Philip Seymour Hoffman,
       and Lara Flynn Boyle
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.85:1
       USA, 1998
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Title
Review for Shallow Grave (1994)
     There's a guaranteed audience these days for the "sophisticated
thriller."  In genrespeak, that's the movie with a self-consciously
twisting and turning plotline, overtly intelligent characters, and a
calculated streak of nastiness allowing the viewer to feel truly
decadent, giggling along with the filmmakers. SHALLOW GRAVE is such a
movie, a British import about a trio of flatmates who conspire against
their own better judgment to take advantage of someone else's
ill-gotten gains. When I saw it, with a "sophisticated" crowd, the
folks to the left and right of me were swept up in the movie, cackling
evilly or burying faces in hands when the proceedings on-screen became
particularly gruesome. It's definitely a crowd-pleaser.
     Incredibly, some reviewers have been comparing SHALLOW GRAVE to
Quentin Tarantino's films, as though the director of PULP FICTION
somehow invented the stylish thriller.  Rubbish. SHALLOW GRAVE owes its
existence pretty much in its entirety to the films of Alfred Hitchcock,
which it apes shamelessly. It's a canny imitation, and the director has
done enough homework to know what kind of homage works and what's just
stupid (the movie is fiercely intelligent). But intelligence alone
doesn't completely compensate for SHALLOW GRAVE's shortcomings. Perhaps
overconfidence leads this film to count on its audience being so
delighted by each new odd camera angle and unexpected revelation that
it becomes lazy in terms of showing us anything truly surprising.
     The film opens with a crazy high-speed tour of city streets, set
to a thumping high energy soundtrack. It resembles nothing so much as
Shinya Tsukamoto's cautionary horror fable TETSUO, and it's hard to
understand why the film takes such a hyperkinetic approach during its
opening credits. Things slow down from there, as we settle in for a
study of three characters sharing an apartment--Alex (Ewan McGregor),
David (Christopher Eccleston), and Juliet (Kerry Fox). The casual
cruelty of these characters is established immediately, as they
interview and humiliate potential roommates. Alex is the most outgoing
of the three, with the loosest tongue.  David is shy and retreating,
while the smart and sensible Juliet (whose boyfriend is conspicuously
absent) functions as the apex of a very repressed sexual triangle. They
finally settle on a strange fellow named Hugo (Keith Allen), an
apparently well-off writer who pays his first rent in cash. But soon,
Hugo is a corpse, and the suitcase of cash he leaves behind in his
bedroom is too much of a temptation. What if, Alex wants to know, the
three of them dispose of the body and keep the money?
     That's probably the first 10 minutes. The rest of the movie
springs out of that proposition, as the situation becomes more and more
precarious and the riches bring out the worst in everybody. The ensuing
shenanigans are both intense and wickedly funny, and it wouldn't do to
spoil them here. It's very easy to place yourself in these roles, and
the triumph of any thriller is that the audience feels the fear and
isolation of the characters. But while one character's complete
transformation is essential to the storyline, it's wholly unbelievable.
The sexual dynamics (which pivot on Juliet's status as an object of
desire) are intriguing and well-handled, but Boyle's relentless homage
to Hitchcock (odd camera angles, snickering gallows humor, and shots
lifted wholesale from VERTIGO and PSYCHO) wears thin.  It's more than a
little disappointing when the credits finally roll, because we hope for
more from this clever thriller.  But perhaps it's to the director's
credit that we really do want to spend more time with these rather
unpleasant people, feeding ravenously, vicariously off of their
actions.

Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
It took me some time to catch up with Secrets and Lies, but I
finally saw it on Thanksgiving Day. The timing could not be
more appropriate, really, since that holiday is most closely
tied in my mind to family gatherings, especially reluctant
ones. Considerations of family are key to Mike Leigh's
much-lauded film, which culminates at a forced family
gathering turned nearly riotous by the presence of brothers,
sisters, in-laws, and strangers.
As the movie begins, a young black Englishwoman named
Hortense is helping bury her adoptive mother. In the
aftermath of the funeral, something inside compels her to
seek out her birth mother. A quick visit to a social worker
nets Hortense her own adoption paperwork (her mother, she
learns, is white), and a few more minutes of research give
her the address of a sad little flat in London's East End.
The resident of that flat is Cynthia Purley (Brenda Bethlyn),
a lonely woman who keeps her home stuffed full of trinkets
from her past, works in a factory, and laments the bitterness
incipient in her 20-year old daughter, Roxanne (Claire
Rushbrook). She's all but lost touch with her beloved
brother, Maurice (Timothy Spall), and his wife, Monica
(Phyllis Logan), when Maurice drops by to invite her and her
daughter to celebrate Roxanne's impending 21st birthday with
a backyard barbecue at his house. Maurice is the comfortably
successful owner of a photography studio, and Cynthia blames
Monica for having shut her out of his life while building a
comfortable, insular home for the two of them.
The mere fact of Maurice's visit is doubtless the highlight
of Cynthia's week, but her excitement is overshadowed by
shock and trepidation when she receives a phone call from
Hortense -- when she realizes she's speaking to the daughter
she tried to leave behind, Cynthia slams the telephone down
in terror. Hortense rings back immediately, intent on meeting
her mother, but Cynthia insists that Hortense must never
visit Cynthia's home or even call her again. Eventually, the
two of them agree to face each other on neutral ground
outside a tube station, and the film's revelatory centerpiece
is the ensuing conversation over tea and the profoundly
disturbing yet liberating effect it has on Cynthia. Before
the film is over, that conversation will prove to have
transformed Cynthia and indeed everyone around her.
Mike Leigh's films give "ensemble cast" an enhanced meaning.
His performers are in on the creative process, riffing on the
material they're given en route to a finished screenplay, and
while Leigh's films are distinctly his own, his characters
and situations ring with a nearly uncanny truth that seems to
indicate the efficiency of this technique. The performances
in Secrets and Lies are remarkable, and only the characters
of Roxanne and her boyfriend Paul ring a little hollow,
perhaps for lack of screen time.
Bethlyn in particular is extraordinary. I was reminded
immediately of Emily Watson's performance in Breaking the
Waves -- another 1996 picture that's utterly reliant on the
abilities of its lead performer to penetrate to the essence
of a character under the camera's intense scrutiny. Bethlyn's
Cynthia is admirable, bold, and pathetic all at once. She
places an emphasis on her character's faded youth without
overstatement and helps Secrets and Lies overcome the more
pedestrian of its urges.
Those urges bubble to the surface in a broth that is the
climactic birthday party. Cynthia has invited Hortense to the
party under the pretense that she's a friend from work. More
inexplicably, Hortense has agreed to come along. I'm not
spoiling anything by telling you that her presence leads to a
dramatic unraveling of some very tightly knotted
personalities -- the interest is in seeing how Leigh gets
them to the breaking point and what happens to these
characters when all hell bursts loose. This screeching,
sobbing kaleidoscope of emotion verges on farce, and I think
Leigh realizes that -- witness the grimace on Paul's face as
he watches the family work through this melodrama.
Mostly, it's a wise and gentle affirmation of our ability to
work through the spitefulness that can spoil a family, and a
catalog of the ways in which we can absolutely fail to
communicate with the people who need us the most. Still, I'm
bothered by the nearly glib tidiness of this resolution. It's
a fairy tale for dysfunctional adults, right down to
Maurice's speechifying at the end -- a diatribe against
mistrust that's already been telegraphed by the movie's
title. Leigh spends the movie setting up these impacted
relationships just to knock 'em down, and I'm afraid that
there's a pat structure here that puts me off in the same way
that Lone Star disappointed me. Certainly Secrets and Lies
lacks the odd narrative and skewed characters that made a
first viewing of Leigh's previous film, Naked, such a
memorable and unpredictable experience.
But don't get me wrong. Secrets and Lies is 99 percent
compelling, beautifully acted, and at times very funny --
through and through, it's one of the best films of the year,
with characters that are both down to earth and much larger
than life. More than anybody, cinephiles everywhere have
Bethlyn to thank for one raging catharsis of a performance
that reveals in a way that mere words, however carefully
scripted, never can.

Title
Review for Parapluies de Cherbourg, Les (1964)
        One of these days, somebody may come along and make another great
musical. I'm not talking about PENNIES FROM HEAVEN, the British miniseries
(and Hollywood remake) that defined the impossibility of making another
great musical. I'm not talking about likely embarrassments like the
forthcoming EVITA, either. (If you ask me, the best thing that could
happen to Broadway musicals right now might be the announcement of Andrew
Lloyd Webber's imminent retirement.) I want an intelligent, tuneful
extravaganza along the lines of something Stanley Donen might have made --
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN or even FUNNY FACE. 
        You can hold your breath waiting for that to happen -- when you
get frustrated, but before you've quite turned blue, visit your local art
house for the revival of THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG. This singular little
production was first exported from France in 1964, and while it's not
quite as intoxicated on its own production values as the liveliest MGM
musicals, it probably benefits from its perspective on the self-aware
trailing edge of the vaunted Nouvelle Vague. Director Jacques Demy and
composer Michel Legrand tread confidently through dangerous territory,
concocting the film as a "pure"  musical -- almost an operetta, with no
spoken lines of dialogue at all, only song. In an oddly prescient casting
coup, the relative ingenue Catherine Deneuve was given the lead role of
Genevieve, the young daughter of an umbrella shop owner. She is in love
somewhat beneath her station, with Guy, an auto mechanic played sweetly by
Nino Castelnuevo. Naturally, Genevieve's mother registers gentle but firm
disapproval of this relationship, and it's with a mixture of pragmatism
and relief that she consoles her daughter on the news that her sweetheart
has been drafted into two years of military service. 
        The film is divided into three sections, and for my money, the
first is at once the most melodramatic and the most affecting. Titled
"Departure,"  this act chronicles the headlong affection of the two lovers
and the lush, nearly intolerable torture exacted on them when they learn
of their impending separation. It culminates in a wrenching, tear-soaked
railway platform farewell that's no less powerful for being a cinematic
hand-me-down. A tremendous asset is Legrand's love theme, which has
already intimated itself into the film's texture, but here is sweeping and
thunderous in full Dolby reverb. 
        I'm usually wary of remixed soundtracks, but it does seem to make
sense with material as musical as this (or the reissued TAXI DRIVER, which
rated similar treatment for Bernard Herrmann's fine score). As remixed by
Legrand himself, THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG sounds fine and looks even
better, although some of the more colorful shots bear artifacts of the
technicolor restoration process -- the original Eastmancolor release
negative has been unusable for most of the film's life. 
        Even so, it might have been nice if the color scheme weren't quite
so insistent. While the relentless mirroring of loud wallpaper with
equally shrill, matching costumes helps to establish a level of ironic
detachment that may be key to the film, it certainly breaks the spell of
the flatly gorgeous song and earnest performances. And after the nearly
perfect first segment, the second of three acts is a little tiresome,
plodding toward a foregone conclusion. 
        I hope I'm not spoiling anything if I tell you that the second act
is titled "Absence" and the third "Return." While Guy is away, Genevieve's
mother is given the opportunity to quietly encourage her to marry her new
suitor, a world-traveling jewelry dealer. Genevieve remains fond of Guy,
but finally relents and agrees to be married (viewers may note that, even
in this relatively fresh-faced persona, Deneuve was acquiring her
reputation as aloof and untouchable.) In the third act, Guy returns and
finds that -- well, he finds that everything has changed. 
        It's perhaps a characteristic of Demy's New Wave sensibility (he
had recently married Agnes Varda, after all) that a film this delirious in
its visuals and rapturous emoting can be, at the same time, so
distressingly sober. Demy's film doesn't give Guy the chance to woo and
win back his beloved, and it barely allows him his own sadness. The real
sadness, interestingly, is our own. These lives have not turned out the
way they had once seemed predestined, nor does the film turn out the way
we had hoped it might. The final scene, which at last reunites the two,
ever so briefly, is perhaps unavoidable, but this story is an inexorably
sorrowful one.  Denied our escapist pleasure, we can only watch,
misty-eyed, as the cinematic dream falls apart -- as the musical,
presumably, deconstructs itself.

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
     RESERVOIR DOGS (1992), of course, is the epochal film by
Quentin Tarantino that borrowed most of its ideas from the bank of
movie history, and then put such a hip, self-aware spin on the
proceedings that it pretty much revolutionized American movie-going, if
not filmmaking.  RASHOMON (1950) is the epochal film by Akira Kurosawa
that told the story of a crime four different ways, from four different
perspectives, and thoroughly debunked the veracity that had previously
been ascribed to stories told with the motion picture camera.  Like
RASHOMON, THE USUAL SUSPECTS shows us key events only in flashback, and
since we're hearing the narrative from a con man who's being
interrogated by a cop, we--like the cop--have to wonder whether he's
telling the truth.  Like RESERVOIR DOGS, it gives us an assemblage of
hoods who would be fairly distasteful and uninteresting if not for a
skewed code of values, and relies on snappy dialogue and character tics
to build their personalities.
     The problem comes when screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie tries to
cross Kurosawa with Tarantino, and winds up subverting both of them in
search of a big payoff that apes Hitchcock.  Director Bryan Singer
works so hard at evoking an air of world-weary fatalism that it's a
shame to find out, at the end, that the little things--like characters
and story--don't matter as much as the oh-so-clever denouement.
     The movie opens "last night," as a subtitle explains, when some
kind of a gunfight has ended with the death of nearly everyone on-board
a ship that's been burned to a crisp at the docks.  In the "present
day," customs agent Kujan (Chazz Palminteri, who was so good in BULLETS
OVER BROADWAY but has less to do here) is grilling a survivor of the
shoot-out nicknamed Verbal (Kevin Spacey) about the events that
transpired since he and four other ex- convicts were gathered "six
weeks ago" for a police lineup having something to do with a hijacked
shipment of guns.  The rest of the movie switches between Kujan's
interrogation of Verbal and Verbal's recollection of how he and his
co-conspirators found themselves in the middle of a $91 million deal at
the docks.  Among the neat tricks that this structure allows (it
actually reminds me most of CITIZEN KANE) is a couple of scenes where
Kujan gets a new lead on the case during real time and then bursts back
into the room to pull his new knowledge on Verbal, who's visibly
agitated that the cop knows so much.
     What's Verbal got to hide?  Well, that's unclear until we
eventually learn about a mythical Turkish figure who's putting these
hapless characters through their paces, and who Verbal fears will have
him killed if Verbal spills the beans.  This figure, named Kaiser Zose
(sp? My kingdom for a press kit!), is probably the movie's most
interesting creation.  The only one of Verbal's companions who's of
much interest is Gabriel Byrne's Keaton, the ex-con with a heart of
gold who's trying to build a new life for himself.  Of course, we've
seen this character about a zillion times before (most recently played
by David Caruso in Barbet Schroeder's KISS OF DEATH), but Byrne is
endearing, and his lawyer girlfriend Edie (played by Suzy Amis, who has
a small role, but a knack for picking interesting scripts) is testimony
to his new domestic impulses.  The script goes out of its way to paint
Byrne's Keaton as a decent man trapped in a noirish downward spiral,
and the most intriguing part of the movie may have to do with the
questions that begin to swirl about his real intentions.  Kevin
Spacey's performance as Verbal is thoroughly engaging, which is
fortunate, since he's the real story-teller.  It's the rest of the gang,
who act more like stereotypes from made-for-cable thrillers, that turn
us off from caring too much about their plight.
     Is it spoiling anything to say that this movie's raison d'etre is
the surprise ending?  I haven't seen a critic yet keep his or her mouth
shut about it (shades of THE CRYING GAME), and your enjoyment of the
movie may well hinge on exactly how much you appreciate the plot
twists.  THE USUAL SUSPECTS is one of those movies that's terrifically
entertaining, but leaves you somewhat cold afterward.  I can't imagine
sitting through it a second time, although some folks say that's
exactly what they did, to make sure they got everything straight.  The
dialogue is pretty stiff (with Palminteri's standard-issue whodunit
monologue near the end a stand-out example), and it becomes hard to
care about characters when we know the movie really doesn't.
     The editing (by John Ottman) is very interesting, with certain
scenes shot and put together seemingly to maximize confusion.  In other
places, the narrative becomes disjointed, with near-jump cuts from
character to character threatening to befuddle the casual viewer.  The
direction also veers toward a jarring artiness, with a flashback
dissolving into a coffee cup, the camera making Caligari angles out of
an elevator shaft, and a few more apparent sub-Scorseseisms.  All of
this looked a little careless on the surface, but I suspect the
artifice was carefully employed to maximize audience involvement with
an edgy story line that is, really, coming out of the mouth of one of
its characters.  The technique seems to have worked -- the Friday night
crowd I saw it with was quite willingly strung along, with folks
sitting forward in their seats to pay closer attention, gasping at all
the right moments and chattering happily, minds boggled as they spilled
out onto the city sidewalks for the walk home.
     Like this spring's SHALLOW GRAVE, THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a
crowd-pleaser, but I'm similarly suspicious of the film's merits.
Quentin Tarantino is a very clever filmmaker, but he's also a
perfectionist auteur whose whacked-out persona shines loud and clear
through his pictures, even the one (TRUE ROMANCE) he didn't direct.
Clever by itself isn't enough, and it takes a little more raw energy to
propel a film that's about an ensemble of characters who are doomed
even before the first reel threads its way into the projector.  And
while Singer happily acknowledged the influence of RASHOMON in
pre-release interviews, somebody here seems not to have noticed that
the only reason the trick worked for Kurosawa is that lives were
changed by the way that those stories were told.  The only thing that
really changes over the course of THE USUAL SUSPECTS is a policeman's
ideas about who was responsible for a crime, and an audience's ideas
about what the hell is going on.
DEEP FOCUS: Archived Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
What can you say about an alien invasion film with absolutely no sense of
danger or menace? Independence Day is an expensive film with ominous
production design, and while I was rooting for this movie to tear the roof
off the multiplex, nothing that happens on screen ever really gels.
Impressive as some of the special effects are -- and some of the shots
toward the end of the film are mighty impressive -- they're put to work in
support of a story that hardly seems to have been written, and a film that
hardly seems to have been directed. 
The concept is aces, though. On July 2, an alien mothership parks
somewhere this side of the moon and dispatches a squadron of 15-mile-wide
flying saucers to hover over the major cities of the world. The U.S.
government tries to send a friendly message, and flaky citizens from coast
to coast throw rooftop celebrations welcoming the alien visitors. The
aliens crash the party by decimating New York, Los Angeles, and Washington
D.C. On July 3, the remaining humans try in vain to fight back with
outmoded weaponry, until a charming nerd posits a devastating weakness in
the mothership's systems. On July 4, the counterattack begins. 
What we have here is a big movie, shot on location in Los Angeles, New
York City, and in the deserts of Arizona and Utah. The special effects are
big, featuring not just the destruction of some very large landmarks in
American cities, but also panoramic dogfights filling up the wide screen
with tiny spaceships and jet fighters. This is perhaps the year's most
ambitious movie, and it's almost hard to imagine that anyone in Hollywood
has been doing anything but post-production work on this behemoth of a
summer movie for the last three or four months. 
So how do you go wrong with a project like this? Well, for starters, maybe
you cast Bill Pullman as the President and ostensible leader of the
resistance. Oops. Pullman has seemed ill at ease in just about every role
he's ever played, and this one is no exception. Granted, he's playing a
character who's supposed to be adrift, but you have to wonder how this guy
ever got elected (if you read this as political commentary, maybe that's
the point -- but at the very least, couldn't Emmerich and Devlin hire a
speechwriter to come in and give the President's pep talks some rhetorical
juice?). 
Jeff Goldblum may think he's propping up his resume by continuing to play
the requisite blockbuster nerd, but I hope he's socking away the paychecks
for a rainy day, since this sort of noncommittal performance is likely to
lead him nowhere. Judd Hirsch plays Goldblum's tiresome father as written
-- a hopelessly overstated Jew, sort of like Billy Crystal with none of
the charm. Randy Quaid hams it up in a supporting role as the Lunatic Who
Makes Good, and Mary McDonnell is completely wasted as the First Lady.
(Ironic that James Duval plays a small role, since he starred in The Doom
Generation, Gregg Araki's black valentine to mainstream filmmaking, just
last year.)
The tremendously likable Will Smith, on the other hand, almost steals the
film away from the special effects team. This is the first time I can
recall Hollywood allowing a black man to be the unmitigated star of such a
high-stakes production, and Smith breaks the door wide open. In fact, I
can't help but think that Independence Day would have been a much better
movie if it had started and ended with his character. Instead,
Independence Day tries hard to be an epic, purporting to bring heroes
together across international borders and cultural lines even as it
nurtures its quintessentially American identity. 
Independence Day is a little more than two hours long, but not nearly long
enough to properly contain all of its own ideas. Fast pacing is a virtue
in this age of cgi effects and digital editing, but ID cuts its own
expository scenes so close to the bone that they can't take advantage of
their own strengths. The biggest exception comes during the film's
midsection, as Smith lugs an unconscious alien across white desert sands
to be incarcerated at a secret U.S. military base. Tirelessly exploiting
the American survivalist instinct, X-Files style SF paranoia, and outright
xenophobia, these scenes feature the movie's best ideas, its most honest
gags, and -- not coincidentally -- its most intense set piece, which
recalls Alien and John Carpenter's The Thing. 
Unfortunately, the tension level drops from there on out as the story
becomes more and more ludicrous and the special effects become more and
more of an end in themselves. If only there had been some way to bring
alien and human face to face one more time, in a stand-off that would
require a little more wit than punching keys on a keyboard, or clocking
the little alien dude once across the face, Independence Day might have
goosed its way to a more gripping conclusion. As it is, the movie shoots
its wad early on, running out of shocks and surprises way too soon. 
Most observations a critic can make are purely academic, of course, in the
face of what's sure to be overwhelmingly positive audience reaction. In
the absence of any other obvious science fiction or fantasy blockbusters,
Independence Day is a big release valve for the kind of tension that just
can't be loosed even by Schwarzenegger, tornadoes, and Tom Cruise (in that
way, it's a lot like Emmerich and Devlin's previous project, Stargate).
During the movie's big tearjerking scene, a woman in the row ahead of me
was sobbing loudly; at a big action payoff, the teenager sitting behind me
was shouting, I swear, "Yes, yes, yes! Yes! YES!" like Meg Ryan at Katz's
Deli. 
I know it might seem churlish to deny those pleasures, but for my eight
bucks, Independence Day just didn't deliver. (After the White House blew
up, I started checking my watch, which is never a good sign.) George
Lucas, Steven Spielberg, and hell, even James Cameron have made their
careers on this sort of picture -- the budget-blowing summer extravaganza.
And say what you will about the relative merits of True Lies or Jurassic
Park, those movies all come with points of view that demonstrate their
essential humanity. Terminator 2 is scary, funny, disgusting, and
exhilarating because Cameron is a formidable narrative alchemist. Jurassic
Park veers effectively from dinosaur terror to paternal tenderness because
Spielberg understands that the horrific can reveal the truly humane in all
of us (I suppose Schindler's List functions on the same principle). 
For all its history-making FX work, what Independence Day delivers is
mainly earthbound leftovers from the Star Wars trilogy wrapped around some
obvious Twister-style "human drama" that involves separated spouses who
still love each other. If those relationships are oddly devoid of passion,
it's for the same reason that a movie involving the murder of tens of
millions of people is oddly bloodless. In its misguided quest for
universal appeal, Independence Day is far too calculated, takes too few
risks, and shows us not nearly enough about the way human beings really
react under pressure. All the right buttons are being pushed, but
Independence Day doesn't have a point of view, or a beating heart. 

Title
Review for Marianne (1997)
MARIANNE, which world premiered at the "Rendez-Vous With
French Cinema Today" series in New York City March 15, is a
lithe adaptation of an unfinished novel by the French writer
Marivaux, an 18th century observer of courtship rituals and
the human emotions involved. But what's remarkable about the
film -- and what drew a sell-out crowd to the Walter Reade
Theater on opening night -- isn't so much its literary
pedigree. Rather, it's the pairing of director Benoit Jacquot
once more with Virginie Ledoyen, the hottest young thing in
French cinema and the star of Jacquot's LA FILLE SEULE (A SINGLE
GIRL), released last year to limited audiences but
wide acclaim. Taken together, the two movies seem nearly to
be companion pieces, a strong affirmation of the status of a
film's star as artistic collaborator with the director. The
differences between the two films are interesting, but the
similarities run deeper and give both pictures more distinct
meaning.
The footage that eventually became MARIANNE was actually shot
in 1994 and shown in a three-hour-long version on French
television, bearing Marivaux's original title of LA VIE DE
MARIANNE. But that version of the film is superseded, in the
director's eyes, by the 90-minute distillation that was shown
in New York. Jacquot agreed to make the film on the condition
that it would eventually make its way to a theatrical release
-- but in order to secure funding, he agreed to script a
longer television version at the same time. Jacquot told the
audience that he made no distinction between shooting for the
television screen and shooting for film -- if he wound up
with two different versions of the same shot, he kept the
superior one in reserve for the theatrical version and used
the inferior take for television.
Indeed, it's hard to imagine how this loveliest of movies
would be appreciated on the small screen. First, there's the
issue of Ledoyen's abiding beauty, which is magnified to
superhuman proportions on the big screen. My favorite example
is a scene which cuts between close-ups of her face and that
of the actor playing her suitor, Valville (sorry, no press
notes). Both young performers are handsome ("It's the face
that's important," Jacquot will snap later, when asked about
the challenges of shooting costume drama), but what's more
striking is the clarity of the image. Valville's face is
angles and ridges, sharply defined with only a hint of
menace. And Ledoyen's is all rich, gentle curves, the whites
of her eyes impossibly smooth and clean, like pools of milk.
Ledoyen's Marianne is an orphaned child whose story we follow
after she turns 15. Marianne has no idea who her parents
were, but believes she is of noble lineage and carries
herself with the bearing of an aristocrat who feels distaste
at the thought of consorting with the lower class. (It's to
Ledoyen's credit that she can bring this off without playing
a petulant brat.) She's taken in by an older man who, like
everyone in this film, is taken with her beauty. He puts her
up at the home of a linen merchant, where she finds some
degree of contentment. But soon he's confessing his love and
suggesting that she accept his offer of a private apartment
and a monthly paycheck. The thought of becoming a kept woman
both shocks and shames her, and instead she takes up
residence in a nearby convent. In the meantime, Valville has
also fallen in love with her, and while those attentions are
more to her liking, they will prove to make her life ever
more complicated.
While I could imagine where the television version probably
fleshed situations out a bit more, this story moves along at
a surprisingly lively clip. Costume dramas are rarely notable
for their brevity, but this one is imbued with a spirit and
humor that highlights the fogeyism of, say, your typical
Merchant Ivory production. Jacquot's direction, which is here
very theatrical and there distinctly cinematic, has a lot to
do with the film's airy tone. One scene between Marianne and
her would-be benefactor is played nearly as stagebound farce,
with the camera panning to and fro to catch the two
characters tugging each another this way and that. Elsewhere,
Jacquot's camera will lurch suddenly toward a character's
face in a tracking move worthy of a Spielberg or Scorsese.
The end result is eminently watchable and hardly dull.
The effortlessly lush cinematography is its own pleasure, but
also augments the fine performances of everyone involved.
There's not a false note, even as men and women alike trip
over themselves to sing Marianne's praises -- how lovely she
is, and how pure of heart -- and even as the story treads
into the potentially maudlin territory of jealousy,
duplicity, and revenge.
But MARIANNE is truly accessible because of Ledoyen's
immensely appealing presence. Ledoyen plays her character as
an apparently guileless young woman with smarts in reserve.
More than a pretty face, she is, as Valville's mother
describes her early on, "alarmingly" beautiful. The camera
dances with her here the same way it does in A SINGLE GIRL.
It follows her down the street as men spin on their feet to
look her up and down and it lingers behind her, evoking the
stare of villagers admiring her in church even as we gaze
upon the nape of her neck, 30 feet high, from our moviehouse
seats.
It's because her performance is as striking as her luminous
good looks that we do care what finally happens to Marianne.
The film may best be described as an anti-romance. Offers of
marriage come at our protagonist seemingly from all
directions, but we wind up rooting against her acceptance of
any of them. The story does finally culminate in a wedding --
but of Jacquot's invention, not Marivaux's.
"Marriage is a nightmare," the director told his audience
after the screening, with just the hint of a rakish grin
creeping onto his face. Whether you want to argue that or
not, it's hard not to notice that Jacquot's two most recent
films paint matrimony as something to be feared. But taken
together with A SINGLE GIRL, the basic moral of this tale
seems to be that a woman's independence is something for her
to cherish. In fact, those of us who believe in reincarnation
-- in the cinema, at least -- will likely get the distinct
feeling that A SINGLE GIRL functions in part to help set
Marianne free.

Title
Review for Cité des enfants perdus, La (1995)
     The best poster art of 1995 is unquestionably the composite still
featured on ads for THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, showing a muscular
redheaded man purposefully rowing a boat across a sea peppered with
floating mines.  At the bow of the vessel, a younger girl, perhaps 10
years old, looks back over her shoulder almost balefully.  They're en
route to what looks like a cross between a mist-shrouded palace and an
oil rig, matte painted in sillhouette against the moonrise.  It's said
that a picture is worth a thousand words, but this one teases, offering
glimpses of a story that exists in the imagination, and is not
necessarily dependent on the "reality" established by the film it's
meant to promote.
     That picture isn't taken directly from the film, but it may as
well be.  Its evocative power is indicative of the real strengths of
the filmmaking duo of Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro.  These two
headstrong fantasists cut their teeth on music videos and television
commercials before settling in to make the much admired DELICATESSEN
(1991), a black European comedy about cannibalism.  Accordingly,
American audiences had their first real exposure to Jeunet and Caro
when art houses nationwide were blitzed with that film's trailer--a set
piece drawn straight from the movie itself, and involving the apparent
rhythms of lovemaking in an apartment building from hell and its impact
on everyday life in adjacent rooms.  To this day, even movie fans who
never saw the actual movie still harbor vivid memories of seeing the
brilliantly entertaining trailer to DELICATESSEN.
     That mastery of imagery and montage is what keeps Jeunet and
Caro's newest film from being a mere clutter of dazzling images.  CITY
OF LOST CHILDREN is something of a fable set in a city in either the
future or an alternate reality.  The movie has to do with a scientist
named Krank (Daniel Emilfork), who is aging prematurely because he
lacks the ability to dream.  Fighting to reverse the aging process, he
sends his blind minions out to kidnap the city's most potent
dreamers--the children--and bring them back so he can invade the
children's dreams and make them his own.  Circus strongman One (Ron
Perlman, the beefy guy from the posters) gets involved when his adopted
brother, little Denree (Joseph Lucien), is abducted by the Cyclops, who
see the world through one electronic eye and do Krank's bidding.
Events turn, and One teams up with the orphan Miette (Judith Vittet) on
a mission to invade Krank's laboratory and rescue his beloved brother.
The other characters in the laboratory include Krank's assistant, Miss
Bismuth (Mireille Mosse), a disembodied talking brain floating in a
fish tank (given witty, world- weary voice by Jean-Louis Trintignant),
and a battalion of clones (all of them played by Dominique Pinon).
     The actors are more than up to the challenge of breathing life
into the concept.  Perlman, a busy actor whose credits include THE NAME
OF THE ROSE, ROMEO IS BLEEDING, and last year's CRONOS, is entirely
credible as the simple strong man driven to his quest by love for a
child.  Daniel Emilfork's Krank is a bizarre yet pathetic creation, and
our distate for his persona is mitigated by our understanding of his
desperation (after all, we're the ones who paid money to visit someone
else's dream for an hour or two).  And whether it's Vittet playing an
orphan who's become wise and jaded beyond her years, or Lucien as the
toddler who's mostly unfazed by the pyrotechnics that have the other
kids screaming, the children here defy the Hollywood standard of
cinematic children who are by turns cutesy pies or obnoxious hams.
Since the children are the film's center, the metaphorical imaginative
core of a society that has perhaps forgotten the value of its dreams,
it's reassuring that the actors give unmannered performances that put
the histrionic antics of celebrity brats like Macauley Culkin in proper
perspective.
     Aided and abetted by Jean-Paul Gaultier's costuming, Caro's art
direction ensures that this city truly is something to behold, although
our visit is fragmented so that we have little opportunity to get a
sense for a whole environment.  For the most part, Caro and Jeunet
create their nightmare world by stacking their most striking visuals on
top of one another in a shot-by- shot montage that amplifies the
chaos.  But the real show-stoppers are the sequences that stretch the
film's tightly constrained sense of location while staying within the
episodic format (the best involves a spider's web, a shipwreck, and a
healthy sense of wonder), though even that doesn't shake the constant
feeling that we're watching master craftsmen at work, not peeking into
another universe.
     But when they work, oh boy, do they work.  Jeunet and Caro have a
keen sense of their characters, from the lead roles all the way down to
the bit parts, and the crucial dream sequences are marvelously surreal,
right down to the accompanying sound mix. (It's fitting that Sony is
releasing this one just before Christmas, because Santa figures in a
couple of the dreams, for better or for worse.) Angelo Badalamenti's
music is surprisingly effective throughout, and Miette's final
nightmare is nothing short of breathtaking.  The film contains a
remarkable number of digital effects shots, and indeed, is surprisingly
reliant on technical wizardry, whether it's allowing Pinon to play six
different parts on-screen at the same time, or enabling show- stopping
close-ups of Fleakins, the bug who offers up a flea's-eye view of the
world before shooting characters up with a strange poison.  The rich,
shadowy cinematography, which is a key part of the weirdness at work
here, is by Darius Khondji, who shot DELICATESSEN but also, probably
more famously, this year's Hollywood hit, SE7EN.
     But somewhere in the middle of all this, there's a story that
needs to be told, and the one here is just a little humdrum.  For all
its whacked-out creativity, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN is a bit short on
ideas for what to do with itself.  The dream thievery is reduced to a
child-in-peril excuse to get our obligatory hero into the laboratory,
and Krank's invasion of dreams isn't even fully distinguished from what
we might expect from a Nightmare on Elm Street sequel.  And at the
climax, we're treated to a pretty rote escape-from-the-madman routine
that ends in a big explosion a la any number of American action
movies.  Would that a movie this wondrous weren't simultaneously so
formulaic.
     I'd hate to discourage any fan of the surreal from buying a
ticket, since it's a truly impressive piece of work.  Still, something
very important is missing.  It's all well and good to break out all the
wide-angle lenses, run amok with the set design, and frighten a few
children, but I do wish there was a little more light at the end of the
tunnel.  It seems that Jeunet and Caro are very satisfied with what
they have wrought, but it's hard to experience the film on a very
personal level, because we're never given the sense that anything real
is at stake, or that there's anything in the rather unpleasant world
presented to us that's really worth fighting for.  For all their
formidable skills, Jeunet & Caro need to balance all of the nightmare
and grimace with just a little bit of hope and magic.  I'm rooting for
them to deliver the goods next time -- but I'm not sure they have it in
them.
     Technical note: The credit scroll bears a designation that some
prints have been struck with digital sound, but the theater I was in
just turned the Dolby Stereo up to a full roar.  The almost deafening
volume was appropriate to the film, but the constant popping and
crackling from the Angelika's overloaded sound system was not.  Try to
see this one in a digital auditorium if you can.

Title
Review for Fille seule, La (1995)
The shot I remember best from A Single Girl is of Virginie
Ledoyen's face in profile, nearly filling the screen as she
changes her clothes. The camera watches from across the room
as Ledoyen pulls off her shirt, but then cuts respectfully to
the close shot, granting her modesty but never looking away.
The movie has a confidence in this lovely face, a conviction
that sometimes, it's enough for us to simply *watch.*
It's true -- Ledoyen's face is something to see, and her
nearly prim, perfectly composed presence helps move the film.
Equally propulsive is the tension generated as director
Benoit Jacquot steadicams his way into elevators, down
hallways, and through the portals of guest rooms at a Paris
hotel. The brilliance of A Single Girl is its elevation of
daily routine and its careful exploitation of voyeurism. When
the movie really works, we're following Ledoyen around in
real time, as she learns her trade as a room service worker.
When it doesn't work, it's because the film is busily
justifying its own existence, as in a framing device
involving two conversations between Valerie and her
boyfriend.
Those conversations are key to the film, because they set up
the conflict inside Valerie's head as she goes through the
motions of her first day on the job. On her way to work, she
tells her boyfriend that she's pregnant. She has to leave
right away, but promises that she'll find a way to come back
in an hour, if he'll wait. Naturally, he does, and what she
tells him then is sort of a foregone conclusion -- but she's
plenty introspective as she walks the halls, crossing into
the private lives of hotel guests and assessing the politics
of the workplace.
A young Russian director once became famous for what's known
as "the Kuleshov effect." As part of a series of
investigations into the nature of film editing, Lev Kuleshov
took raw footage of actor Ivan Mozhukhin's face and intercut
it with unrelated images -- a bowl of soup, a child in a
coffin, and a child playing with toys. Shown the footage with
no introduction, audiences praised the actor's sensitive
portrayals of hunger, grief, and joy. The joke, of course,
was on them, since no such "portrayal" ever existed on screen
or even in the actor's mind -- the emotion was created by the
audience (and herein may lie the key to many a great
performance).
I'm not suggesting that A Single Girl plays similar editing
tricks. As a matter of fact, the edits are painstakingly
naturalistic, necessarily preserving the "real time"
progression of the filmed events. But the whole film may be a
sort of a trick. Given the information that Valerie is
pregnant, we viewers can then project our own imagined
doubts, anxieties, and frustrations onto Ledoyen's largely
emotionless face. Perhaps this is a partial explanation of
the nearly universal raves Ledoyen has been receiving for
this role -- truly, what we "see" up on screen is essentially
a projection of ourselves, the ways that we might experience
a similar life crisis, onto a comfortably beautiful human
specimen.
This is not to diminish anyone's estimation of her talent,
since it's hard to overestimate the value of comfortable
beauty in the cinema -- pundits are claiming that this film's
audiences are witness to the rise of one of the next great
stars of French cinema, and I have no reason to doubt those
assertions. Any young actor should be so lucky as to get this
kind of role. Ledoyen seemed similarly aloof in Oliver
Assayas' excellent Cold Water (which never received a U.S.
release), but in that film she was a world-ravaged enigma,
nearly untouchable. Here, we're encouraged to get up close.
What's really terrific about A Single Girl is its simplicity.
Except for a lengthy, misguided coda, this is compelling in
the best way -- it's nearly guerilla filmmaking. When the
camera follows Ledoyen as she charges down Paris sidewalks,
bystanders get out of her way, gaping quizzically at the
camera -- Jacquot and company didn't even have the luxury of
roping off the streets before shooting their exteriors.
Seat-of-your-pants filmmaking is almost by definition a labor
of love, and such is the crazy energy of the bond between
filmmaker and performer that everyone else in the wide world
just bounces off of Ledoyen as she gets from point A to point
B. It is indeed a pleasure just to watch.

Title
Review for Funeral, The (1996)
"Carry this with you," Ray Tempio's father tells him, handing
him the empty casing of a bullet that the boy has just used
to kill a man. "Nothing will cost you more." At his father's
urging, young Ray executed an enemy of his family. If you
show mercy to your enemies, he's told, they will come back to
kill you.
Ray has carried those words with him through his formative
and adult years, even though they may be a reflection of the
kind of philosophy that led his father to suicide. Still,
it's the philosophy he knows -- part of the worldview he's
locked into. The scene comes in a flashback early in Abel
Ferrara's Depression-era gangster movie, The Funeral. Fans of
Ferrara's earlier work -- which includes King of New York,
Bad Lieutenant and last year's wacked-out vampire allegory,
The Addiction -- should know what to expect, but many others
may be baffled by this oddball crime drama cum murder mystery
cum philosophical treatise. Ferrara's heady moral brew is an
aquired taste: bitter, yet rare and satisfying.
Christopher Walken, Chris Penn, and Vincent Gallo are Ray,
Chez, and Johnny Tempio. The latter brother is laid out dead
in a coffin as the movie begins, three bullet holes in his
chest. Ray, who presides over the funereal household with an
eerie majesty, is bent on vengeance. Chez, a loose cannon, is
just angry. Watch carefully -- Ferrara switches into
flashback without warning, so viewers are advised to keep on
their toes.
We learn more about Johnny -- he was a budding Communist
whose ideals gave him keen interest in his racketeering
family's influence on labor unions. He was a brash loudmouth
who fed his hubris by dating the wife of rival Gaspare
Spoglia (Benicio del Toro). But most of all, he was a Tempio,
and that means Ray is out for blood. Ray's henchmen round up
and question Gaspare, the most likely culprit. But as Ray
investigates deeper, he's confronted with the possibility
that Johnny may have gotten just what was coming to him. And
what then?
The women have had their fill of violence and vengeance.
Ray's wife Jeanette (Anabella Sciorra) confides to Johnny's
fiance (Gretchen Mol) that she's lucky she won't wind up
married to "one of them," and keeps a figure of Saint Agnes
next to the bed, as a reminder of "what happens to you when
you say no." Lancome spokesmodel Isabella Rossellini looks
startlingly world weary as Chez's beleagured wife, and she
has her own saint on the table -- the patroness of treatment
for the insane.
Indeed, it's the very real tribulations of these women that
help keep the testosterone-enhanced performances of Walken
and Penn in check. The Funeral never takes the easy tack of
glamorizing its gangsters, and Sciorra's strong-minded
performance is a tough and unsentimental reminder of how
lives are torn apart by sacred bonds turned unholy.
Ferrara gives her plenty of screen space, since she's got a
pair of scenery-chewing performances to compete with. Walken
is, as ever, giddily hammish. He's intense and scary and very
serious about the role, but there's an element of high comedy
buried underneath the facade. Walken is such a good actor
than even though he's unmistakably aware of how crazy his
character is, he plays it with an unwavering passion even as
he tumbles over the top.
Still, the real kudos must go to Penn, who's stuck exercising
mostly his aptitude for ugliness. I've had my fill of the
abusive male as a character type, but Penn really helps us
understand this one. Ferrara never asks us to excuse Chez's
behavior toward women -- Chez treats his wife poorly and with
little passion; he first rebukes, then forces himself on a
young prostitute who can't comprehend his sudden moralizing
-- but he does remember to show us why this man has a wife
and friends in the first place. In one of the movie's best
and truest scenes, Chez belts out a pop tune, surrounded by
friends and associates at his bar. The exuberant magnetism
Penn summons is undeniable, and a great testament to his
still-underrated talents.
The Funeral isn't all so well-balanced. Ever since Bad
Lieutenant, I've wished Ferrara and longtime collaborator
Nicholas St. John could find a way to better weave their more
didactic concerns into the fabric of the film. As it is, the
film stops dead several times so that the characters can have
conversations that delve into moral responsibility and the
teachings of Catholicism. These are almost Godardian moments,
where the audience is suddenly jerked out of the movie's
fiction-world to be lectured. I also have severe reservations
about the very ending of the picture, which is a big, gaudy
exclamation point at the end of an otherwise well-constructed
story. It may be the logical extension of Chez's tortured
existence, but it's an extension that we could well have
imagined without seeing it actually played out on-screen.
Ferrara got his start making deliciously nasty exploitation
flicks that left nothing much to the imagination (Driller
Killer, Ms. 45). He's now working in a different milieu, and
it's one that he hasn't necessarily come to terms with.
Still, the low-key style he has pioneered over his body of
work, unpleasant and unrelenting, seems to me a more
significant and consistent exploration of modern America's
dark side than anything that's been tried recently. His
accomplishments dwarf the much flashier series of film noir
retreads we've been subjected to, films which simply
fetishize their subject matter rather than exploring it.
Whatever else Ferrara may be, he's an explorer, and The
Funeral may be as good a point as any for a willing neophyte
to join the expedition.

Title
Review for Broken Arrow (1996)
GRADE B+ (Recommended with reservations)
        When Hong Kong action director John Woo made his first American
movie, the Jean-Claude Van Damme vehicle Hard Target, he had to recut and
re-submit it to the ratings board 17 times in order to secure an R rating.
Woo was probably surprised and baffled by the whole process, since Hard
Target was downright languid by HK standards. But in the U.S., Woo's
original cut looked radically violent, albeit strangely poetic. Even
re-edited for Hollywood-style clarity and shorn of 20 minutes of footage,
the released version of Hard Target is a severely flawed but oddly
compelling piece of work. 
       On the bigger-budget Broken Arrow, one would suspect there might be
even less room for Woo to indulge his old habits. In Woo's Hong Kong
movies, outrageous set pieces and severe body counts are part of the
territory, even though Woo himself takes a very moral high ground,
insisting that the graphic violence is a metaphor for his characters'
inner lives (the most violent of all Woo movies, Hard Boiled, is also the
one that deals metaphorically with the upcoming social turbulence of the
1997 reunification of Hong Kong itself with mainland China). 
        In some ways, Broken Arrow is really two movies. One of them is
Hollywood's movie: a blockbuster action picture with militaristic
fetishes, digital special effects, a complicated terrorist storyline, and
a couple of proven box office draws in the lead. The other one is John
Woo's movie: a down-to-earth character study of two men who interact by
trying to outsmart one another, and express their frustrations through
gunfire and sucker punches. Accordingly, the film's biggest flaw is also
its biggest asset. While Broken Arrow is too quirky to be a great
Hollywood action picture, and too straightforward to be a great John Woo
movie, it's fascinating to see the ways that Woo makes the most of what
he's given. 
        What he's given, as anyone who's seen the ads knows, is the story
of pilot Vic Deakins (John Travolta), who beats the crap out of his
partner, Riley Hale (Christian Slater), in mid-flight and dumps their
bomber's payload of two unarmed nuclear bombs into the Utah desert. 
Naturally, he demands payment from the government in exchange for not
blowing up a city. As fast as you can say "Speed 2" or even "Die Hard 4,"
it's up to Hale and plucky park ranger Terry Carmichael (Samantha Mathis,
who co-starred with Slater in Pump Up the Volume) to outsmart Deakins and
foil his plans. 
        Does this sound OK? Well, the script is a big, lumbering
catastrophe. It's written by Speed's screenwriter, Graham Yost, and it's
every bit as outlandish as that film, but has none of the novelty. For
starters, the protracted sense of cause-and-effect that's crucial to a
taut thriller is entirely missing in this plot, where there seems to be no
logical explanation for anything that happens. It takes forever for the
movie to get into gear, partly because the audience is made to lumber
alongside the military types back at Mission Control as they spend two
reels figuring out, duh, that Something's Not RIght. 
        The dialogue is even worse than the story. Slater is earnest and
appealing, and Mathis couldn't be much more charming, but the lines
they're given to spout at each other are mainly of the "Omigosh!" variety.
(Was Woo perhaps unaware of exactly how trite this would sound?) Even so,
Travolta milks this meager material brilliantly and closes right in on his
own character, perhaps sensing an easy kill -- he nets the performance of
his career, and probably saves the film. His psychopath isn't particularly
frightening, but he is funny and charismatic -- unusual for a mad bomber.
And he's the cold, cool center of what may be the film's best scene, a
sadistic seduction episode having to do with Mathis's essential
vulnerability, Travolta's considerable sexual magnetism, and impending
cataclysm. 
        Travolta aside, Woo is the main attraction, and I've got to hand
it to him -- I think our man comes through in the face of adversity. He
cuts straight to the quick, emphasizing the rivalry between Hale and
Deakins in a mesmerizing boxing sequence that opens the film.  (Typical
Woo -a $20 wager placed on that fight becomes a symbol for the detached
oneupsmanship that drives their relationship during the rest of the
movie). And it's a rare comic- book action flick that has so many moments
approaching the sublime. 
        They look like this: Hale wakes up from a night spent crumpled and
bloody on the desert floor as his unfurled parachute, caught by the wind,
tugs him gently across the ground. Or this:  as soon as one of his cohorts
ventures that the sonofabitch might be dead after all, jump cut to
Travolta-as-Deakins rising suddenly out of the landscape in slo-mo
close-up. Or even this:  dazzled by a swarm of butterflies, Hale explains
to his still-unnamed companion that if you see such delicate creatures in
the aftermath of a nuclear detonation, it's a sign that you won't die of
radiation poisoning. 
        Such moments (and others equally Woovian, like Slater suspended in
mid-air, pumping heat at Travolta out of both fists) ensure that Broken
Arrow actually gets better as it goes along.  Critics have suggested that
Woo lacks basic storytelling skills, yet his meaning is clearest when he's
not relying on fancy special effects to carry the show (I lost count of
exactly how many tiresome helicopter crashes we see, but I'll bet every
one of them is digitally enhanced). Even so, it's understandable if
American action fans are wondering why this director gets so much good
press. Woo surely has a great Hollywood movie in him, but after Hard
Target and Broken Arrow, I'm still waiting to see it. 

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
"It disturbs me. People with warped minds are going to like it, though."
- Ted Turner on CRASH
Somewhere in the middle of CRASH, the remarkable new film from David
Cronenberg, James Ballard (James Spader) is caught in traffic. The cars
on the highway are at a standstill, stymied by an impact farther up the
blacktop. Ballard is driving a vintage Lincoln Continental, the kind of
convertible JFK rode through Dallas. The car belongs to Ballard's new
friend Vaughan (Elias Koteas, from EXOTICA), a visionary of sorts who
sees car crashes as "fertilizing," rather than destructive, events. In
the car with Ballard and Vaughan is Ballard's wife, Catherine (Deborah
Kara Unger), who is growing more and more attracted to Vaughan -- she
and Ballard seem to achieve sexual bliss more and more often by
comparing notes on their most recent adulteries. You could almost
consider this menage a trois a special kind of post-nuclear family.
Ballard eases the Lincoln into the breakdown lane and cruises serenely
alongside the stream of cars, finally coming across the steel and
chrome carnage itself. Vaughan's body juts up out of the Lincoln with
his beloved camera pressed to his face, flashbulb popping. It's a
spectacular crash -- at least three cars were involved. Ballard pulls
off the road entirely and the three get out of the Lincoln. Splitting
up and investigating the scene, Ballard, Vaughan and Catherine are
assimilated into the spectacle. Vaughan stalks the victims, taking
snapshots with impunity. The lovely, skeletal Catherine takes a seat
next to a woman whose facial features (we see as she turns toward the
camera) are crossed with blood and grue. Ballard watches from the
periphery as firefighters use saws and heavy-duty shears to perform
cesarean surgery on the cars and birth the bloody drivers and
passengers encased inside.
Imagine the angels from WINGS OF DESIRE investigating the highway
pile-up from Godard's WEEKEND -- that's the paranormal mood at this
crash scene. Further imagine that those angels began taking dirty
pictures of one another amid the wreckage, and you'll get a sense for
what Cronenberg has nearly accomplished. It's a movie about sexual
deviance taken to an extreme that borders on farce, a movie about the
ways human relationships are transforming in the latter years of the
20th century. It would be easy for CRASH to dissolve into high, mordant
comedy -- indeed, this is a witty movie -- but the tone is dry and
mournful throughout. These characters are truly ghosts among the
living.
CRASH is based on the 1973 novel by J.G. Ballard that used clinical,
pornographic language to describe sexual acts in the vocabulary of
automobile fetishists. Semen is smeared across instrument panels, the
marks of hood ornaments and dashboard moldings are embedded in flesh
like blistered tattoos, and orgasms are intimately related to the
thrumming of a car wash, the smell of grease and gasoline, and the
geometry of crumpled metal. The film version is, if you can believe it,
more restrained than the book. But it's an indicator of Cronenberg's
considerable skill that material like this seems at all credible on
celluloid.
CRASH was a rumored Cronenberg project for many years, even before it
became a reality. Certainly it had that sordid high-concept gloss to
it, a Cronenberg trademark: underground community of sexual deviants
gets off on car crashes. And of course it seemed to fit well with
Cronenberg's long-standing mission of investigating the transformative
power of modern technology. His first commercial feature was the
quasi-hedonistic SHIVERS (also 1973), which in its apocalyptic
treatment of venereal disease weirdly prefigured the AIDS epidemic. He
followed that up with films featuring, among other things, mutant sex
organs (RABID, 1977), mutant superpowers (SCANNERS, 1981), and mutant
cable TV (VIDEODROME, 1983). His unnerving DEAD RINGERS (1988) made
disquieting use of a gleaming, fetishistic toolkit of gynecological
instruments for operating on mutant women, and now CRASH suggests that
our obsession with ever more tortuous permutations of sexual
stimulation is itself a mutation -- or, perhaps more chillingly, an
evolution. At least in a metaphorical sense, Cronenberg's sympathies
seem, as always, to be on the side of the deviants.
The film opens with three sex scenes -- bang, bang, bang -- about which
much has been made elsewhere. But it's simply introductory material,
punctuated furiously by a crash scene in which Ballard, driving down a
highway at night trying to read a map by dome light, loses control of
his car, hops the median, and speeds through oncoming traffic for a few
harrowing moments before colliding head-on with another car.  Metal
twists and windshields shatter in real time, and Ballard -- who's
belted in -- winds up with a corpse in his passenger seat. Still
strapped into the other car is the dead man's wife, Helen (Holly
Hunter), and Ballard can only stare blankly at her as she struggles to
undo her own belt -- somehow exposing her left breast in the process.
That sort of fortuitous exhibitionism is emblematic of CRASH's unlikely
sex drive. (The boy-meets-girl premise of the screenplay would make
perfect narrative sense in a less violent context.) But after
introducing Ballard to Helen, Cronenberg orchestrates the ensuing
carnal action with a precise sense of the absurd.
The two don't make love right away, but they do convalesce in the same
hospital, which is usually reserved for airplane crash victims. When
they consummate their strange attraction, it's in the wreckage of
Ballard's car. Helen introduces Ballard to Vaughan, a scarred,
obsessive weirdo who, with a cadre of stunt drivers, recreates famous
car crashes -- the James Dean crash, the Jayne Mansfield crash -- for
small audiences at clandestine gatherings in the dead of night.
Through Vaughan, Ballard meets Gabrielle (Rosanna Arquette), a
flirtacious cripple whose leg braces resemble bondage gear.  Of all the
characters, Gabrielle is the only one who seems to have a sense of
humor -- especially in a scene of Cronenberg's invention that involves
an automobile showroom, a car salesman, Gabrielle's naked thigh, and a
delicate instance of penetration.
>From the metal pins that intrude upon the flesh of Ballard's lacerated
leg to the steering wheel imprint Vaughan has tattooed on his chest
(and the bruises he tattoos upon one of his lovers), CRASH is a science
fiction movie about the body's continued assimilation of its
environment in a motor culture. These are characters whose sexuality
pumps through the cloverleaf veins of the big city, who have deciphered
a secret code to discover a common nonverbal language that indulges,
connects and fulfills them. They feel that the Toronto traffic patterns
are getting heavier, that all the cars are gathering for some reason
they can't understand. If that sounds both trite and mysterious, it's a
neat expression of the human condition in the waning years of the
millenium, of powerlessness and disassociation in the face of the
population explosion.
Through all of this, Unger's Catherine retains a detachment even more
absolute than the occasionally bemused stare of Spader's Ballard. I
found myself wishing I had taken a closer look at all those magazines
Unger has appeared in lately, to figure out how much of what I saw
on-screen was her, and how much was CRASH's version of her. In
close-up, the contours of her face are as stark and angular as the
internal structure of a machine. She runs both hot and cold -- as a
character who removes her clothes so often that it seems like a robotic
functionality, Unger is fine and more than a little creepy.
Creepier is Koteas, whose Vaughan is sharply intelligent but
deceptively brutish. I'm a fan of his work, but I can't help but wonder
whether the script or the characterization is at fault -- I found my
attention drifting exactly twice during CRASH, both times during one of
Vaughan's very Cronenbergian monologues on the nature of crashes and
the "project" being undertaken. Perhaps Cronenberg himself could have
played the part of Vaughan, if only he cut a more imposing figure.
Spader seems completely at ease among these surroundings, which is an
indicator of Ballard's sense of alienation -- when you feel you've done
it all, it makes sense that you'd be willing to try anything.
Of all the cast, only Holly Hunter seems to make a self-conscious
effort at fitting in -- her slightly twerpy line readings only call
attention to themselves. Still, I think that everyone involved in CRASH
should get a trophy, since it's heartening to see "name" actors
fearlessly tackle risky material.
It remains to be seen, at this writing, whether CRASH will become a
flashpoint for debate in the U.S. the way it did in Great Britain,
where even the London tabloids took the film to task with headlines
blaring, "Ban This Car Crash Sex Film!" As might be expected, CRASH can
count among its critics a number of vocal blockheads -- including
studio honcho Ted Turner -- who demonstrate only their inability to
understand the concept of metaphor, or the idea that a film can
investigate deviant activity without necessarily endorsing it.
And CRASH is a rigorous investigation, though it's not everything that
it wants to be. It's a little obscure, a little repetitive, and, worse,
occasionally dull. But the experiment is so compelling, and the moments
that work so mesmerizing, that CRASH ultimately rewards the attention
you give it.
In fact, CRASH marks a fairly spectacular return to form for a
filmmaker who seemed in recent years to become bored with his own
vision. After making what may have been his closest approach to
respectability with the sufficiently brilliant DEAD RINGERS, Cronenberg
retreated into distinctive but comparably tepid adaptations of the
famous work of others -- in 1991, NAKED LUNCH's loose interpretation of
the life of William S. Burroughs and in 1993, M. BUTTERFLY's
squandering of a major studio's resources on a singular treatment of
the famous gender bender that could best be described as, well, odd.
Even though CRASH is another adaptation, Cronenberg and Ballard seem to
be pretty much on the same wavelength. He's returned to his conception
of a sort of underground elite -- the crash fetishists could be a part
of some secret society encompassing a host of refugees from Cronenberg
movies. More than anything he's done since VIDEODROME, CRASH seems to
be another crucial piece of what had once seemed to be the Cronenberg
project -- a phantasmal, cerebral meditation on the evolution of human
deviance. Since his next project is an original screenplay dealing with
virtual reality, we can only hope that his project is back on track.
The true meaning of CRASH is perhaps beyond words. It's shaped, no
doubt, by the viewer's individual reaction to its erotic set pieces. Is
it "sexy?" Well, sometimes. (Your mileage may vary.) Whether it's a
"cautionary tale" has been the subject of some debate. (Cronenberg now
says it's not.) It's certainly not meant for everyone -- in fact, most
viewers may find it either distasteful or simply ludicrous.  The final
lines of dialogue, in particular, induced not-quite-appropriate gales
of laughter at my screening. (It may be worth seeing in a nearly empty
theater for that reason.) But this is serious over-the-top filmmaking,
and the knowledge it imparts is well beyond the ken of almost anything
else that passes for commercial cinema these days.  If you're willing
to buckle up and take the ride, CRASH is a demonstration of
psychosexual decadence that LOST HIGHWAY only dreamed of, a true and
troubled film noir for the end of the millenium.


Title
Review for Leaving Las Vegas (1995)
     In LEAVING LAS VEGAS, Nicolas Cage plays Benjamin, an alcoholic
who's lost his family and his job, and moves to Las Vegas to quite
deliberately drink himself to death over the course of four weeks'
time.  While he's there, he meets a hooker named Sera, played by
Elizabeth Shue, who's cast adrift, so to speak, when her boyfriend and
pimp (Julian Sands) is finally murdered by the thugs he owes money to.
Since these two are just about the neediest people on the planet, they
immediately fall into a codependent relationship. Ben agrees to vacate
his room at the $29-a-night Whole Year Inn (in an unusual moment of
lucidity, Ben reads the sign as "the hole you're in") and move in with
Sera on one condition--she can never ask him to stop drinking.
     I'll say it one more time: LEAVING LAS VEGAS is about a man who
moves to Vegas and drinks himself to death. It's not a comedy, and it's
very depressing.  Still interested? The good news is that the movie is
exceedingly well acted, skillfully crafted, and even, at times, a joy.
That Benjamin's character can be so damn charming in the middle of this
deadly predicament is due to Nicolas Cage's staggering and
ever-expanding talent for playing the loser beautifully. Elizabeth Shue
is remarkable as well, even though her beauty, charisma, and demeanor
totally belie her supposed lot in life as a Vegas street hooker.
Regardless, if critics are talking Nicole Kidman up as an Oscar nominee
for the color-by-numbers TO DIE FOR, Shue ought to clinch the Nobel
Prize for what she goes through bringing this to the screen.
     Thank God director Mike Figgis knows his medium, because this
material would verge on maudlin without sure guidance. John O'Brien's
novel is deliberately harrowing, and it won't make you feel any better
to know that the writer committed suicide just a couple of weeks after
his book was optioned as a film. He would have profited, no doubt, from
the movie's release, but you sense that he and his characters were
living in the same lonely place, and sought release.
     Their sorry lots in life don't bar Ben and Sera from some
semblance of a romantic relationship, and LEAVING LAS VEGAS is indeed a
love story. As far as eroticism goes, the movie's mostly sleazy without
being sexy, and I get the feeling that's an adequate representation of
the city itself. There's certainly nothing romantic about the way Ben
drinks (indeed, he's more or less impotent), though the opening scene
is a jaunty shot of him quite literally dancing down the aisles of a
liquor store, pushing a cart filled with bottles of all shapes and
sizes. When he goes into withdrawal, he trembles and stutters until he
unstops another bottle or drains another glass, and he becomes
remarkably witty and self-assured, if not entirely pleasant. Cage digs
deep to find Benjamin's humanity, and it's brave for the film to allow
this level of dignity to such a blasted out, hopeless character while
acknowledging the fundamental disaster of his life.
     And it's no mean feat for the movie to maintain credibility.
LEAVING LAS VEGAS is about a desperate relationship that somehow
transcends traditional needs, and short circuits the sex drive (Sera
is, after all, going out and turning tricks even after Ben moves in).
One scene, which defines completely the seductive appeal of an
alcoholic haze, has Ben and Sera getting hot and bothered as Sera peels
off her swimsuit and pours liquor down the front of her body in an act
that takes the sublimated sexuality of TV beer commercials to its
erotic extreme. And of course, there's an abrupt comedown from the
sexual high that neatly negates the fetish.
     That's just one great scene in a movie that's full of them, and
with hardly a misstep.  Figgis takes an unconventional, bravura
approach to the film, and it pays off by making the experience
something more than a straightforward sad story (as movie-of-the-week
material, this tale would be deadly). The pre-credit sequence stretches
out for what seems like 10 minutes, until an obstinate, jazzy score
wells up over the credits, also composed by Figgis, which will play in
hip, sidling counterpoint to Benjamin's bleak motives for the rest of
the film. (My own pet peeve is the gaggle of Sting songs that punctuate
the soundtrack, with his vocals so high in the mix that you wind up
thinking about Sting's slightly daffy lyrics instead of the matters
onscreen.) If anything, Figgis' jumpy style is a little too much for
his material, but this is, after all, a story of excess.
     As a treatise on the savagery of alcohol addiction, LEAVING LAS
VEGAS is a winner, but I'm not sure what else Hollywood had in mind
when the story was optioned. To be sure, this is a movie that
brutalizes its characters from start to finish--and poor Sera comes
out the big loser, since Ben is the one who fulfills the mission of the
movie's title.  Curiously, we get no sense of the direction her
character is heading at the end of the film, even though we've
witnessed her desperate devotion to Ben and her abject humiliation at
the hands of lovers and strangers.  Maybe a brilliant movie about
alcoholism must by definition be unsatisfying, but this one's a tough
sell. For all its sincerity and virtue, LEAVING LAS VEGAS is a movie
that empties you out, and doesn't give much back.

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
BREAKING THE WAVES, the powerful new movie from Danish
director Lars von Trier (ZENTROPA, THE KINGDOM) is as
daunting as it is satisfying. The satisfaction comes from von
Trier's audacious and ever-deepening sense for filmmaking --
BREAKING THE WAVES is his most ambitious and skillfully drawn
narrative so far, and it offers the pleasure of undertaking
an uncertain journey, unsure of where it might all end.
That's also what's daunting. BREAKING THE WAVES is epic in
scope, careering wildly from warm and fleshy love story to
grim tragedy to something else entirely over the course of
its 158 minutes. It's a film that demands your rapt attention
bit by bit, plumbing ever-deeper corners of the soul and
plunging at one point into the abyss. Finally, once it's
over, it will return day by day to haunt its audiences. This
is seriously nervy filmmaking.
BREAKING THE WAVES derives its truest power from Emily
Watson's fevered performance in the lead. Watson makes her
film debut as Bess, a young woman in a small Scottish village
who's getting married to Jan, a strapping oil-rig worker, as
the movie begins. The union is looked on with disapproval by
the Presbyterian village elders, who muzzle women's voices in
church and take their greatest apparent satisfaction in
consigning sinners to damnation. To the villagers, Bess is a
suitable case for treatment, an emotional basket case in a
community that prides itself on restraint. But Bess is
determined to marry, and the post-wedding scenes detail her
giddy sexual awakening in explicit yet gentle detail. With
Jan, she has found happiness.
It's not long before Jan is called back to sea, and Bess
lives in dread of the day that he will leave. She can't help
herself -- just before Jan's airborne, she cries out in pain
and rushes the helicopter, pulling the hatch open to take one
last look at her beloved. In another scene, Bess waits all
day beside a country road in the rain, under cover of the
telephone booth where she has arranged to receive Jan's phone
call. The erotically charged conversation is testimony to her
newfound comfort and maturity. She's a woman who takes the
most profound and life-affirming satisfaction in sexual
pleasure, and she prays to God for Jan's swift return. The
prayer is answered -- Jan is clocked on the head by a piece
of heavy equipment and returns to the village on a stretcher,
paralyzed.
Bess blames herself, believing that her prayers are
responsible for Jan's horrible misfortune. Upset that he
can't make love to her, Jan instructs his wife not to dress
in tight clothing, lest he be too aware of her body, out of
reach. And then he tells her she must have sex with other men
so that she can return to his bed and recount her lovemaking
to him -- in this way, he insists, he can be reminded of her
sexuality and his otherwise worthless life can be saved.
We get the distinct feeling that while Bess is nothing but
sincere in her devotion to her husband, Jan's motivations are
at best misguided and at worst downright malevolent.
Ostensibly, he's trying to give her life back to her, but how
could he be unaware of the pain his demands cause her?
Moreover, how can he stand to direct his beloved to debase
herself by, say, sitting next to a 50-year-old stranger at
the back of a bus and giving him a hand job? Or by making a
clumsy, naked pass at Jan's doctor? Still, Jan's condition is
seen to improve as Bess puts out, and that's reason enough
for her to clothe herself in the borrowed trappings of a
cheap whore.
Is this beginning to sound ridiculous, like the thinly
constructed plot of a softcore porn movie on late night cable
TV? Von Trier dares to walk that line, and such is his skill
and conviction that he staves off the inherent tawdriness of
such a concept and invests it with a fierce gravity.
Stylistically, BREAKING THE WAVES has a lot in common with
the director's television project, THE KINGDOM. In his
breakthrough, ZENTROPA, von Trier used every optical trick in
the book to create a highly stylized world -- replete with
rear-projection effects and process shots -- that was more
memorable for its visual impact than for its overreaching
characterization and narrative. But THE KINGDOM was a marvel,
a four-and-a-half hour ghost story that seemed to pass in
little more than a moment. Propelled by a fitful documentary
film style and a picture drained of most color and detail,
THE KINGDOM's supernatural pretensions were validated and
even amplified by a mood that felt like cinema verite.
BREAKING THE WAVES takes much greater risks, and
cinematographer Robbie Mueller (PARIS, TEXAS) was obviously
directed to take a similar approach. The film's bleak look is
reminiscent of THE KINGDOM's -- both were shot on film,
transferred to video and then back to film again, which
leeched out color and detail and imbued the image with an
odd, nearly ethereal quality -- but where THE KINGDOM took
place mostly within the institutional confines of a single
building, BREAKING THE WAVES allows that highly processed,
unnatural patina to infect a village, a countryside, and
indeed the whole world. In this bleak context, Muller, whose
extensive work with Wim Wenders is justly admired, showcases
the fine naturalistic portrayals of the characters peopling
that dim vista. If the bleak imagery represents von Trier's
intellectual guidance, in the rhythm of the camerawork and
the editing we can feel the movie's heartbeat.
And when Mueller's camera hovers for long moments in front of
Emily Watson's face, it finds the movie's soul. Hers is one
of those rare performances that it's impossible to
overpraise. The relationship between Watson and the camera is
reminiscent of nothing so much as the cold and exacting gaze
that delineates Renee Falconetti's monumental performance in
Carl Theodor Dreyer's THE PASSION OF JOAN OF ARC (perhaps
significantly; like Saint Joan, Bess is more or less accused
of heresy). The character of Bess becomes inarguably flesh,
and Watson inhabits that flesh with preternatural aplomb.
With wide, round eyes and slim lips the dark shade of blood,
there's nothing vague about Watson's emoting. Her feelings
are communicated with a precision that can be charming, as
when those lips curl near the cheek to puff a strand of hair
out of her eyes, or wrenching, as when her shriek suddenly
pierces the movie's uncommon quiet. Her marriage has
transformed her suddenly from virgin into a woman of full
sexuality whose very essence seems saturated with pleasure by
the act of lovemaking. (Helena Bonham Carter, who could
hardly be so unspoiled a presence, reportedly won the role of
Bess and then turned it down.) Even when she's carrying on a
two-way conversation with God -- or on those occasions where
she glances directly at the camera -- the character is never
overplayed, and our understanding of Bess is key to our
willingness to follow her on what seems to be rather a
dispiriting journey.
The performances are, in fact, uniformly excellent. The beefy
Stellan Skargaard plays Jan as an imperfect yet admirable
husband, the kind of robust fellow who can truly demand your
sympathy when he's laid up in a hospital bed. His playful
physicality in the early scenes is key to the rest of his
performance, since we need something to remember him by once
he's supine and under the influence of drugs and depression.
And Katrin Cartlidge as Bess's loving sister Dodo, who's at
all times wary of Jan's influence, is the essential
intellectual bridge between the outcast Bess and the rest of
this fundamentalist community. Von Trier's heroine is a Good
Woman, but Dodo helps remind us that her selflessness isn't
wholly admirable, or rational.
That having been said, the real crux of BREAKING THE WAVES is
a circumstance which can't be revealed in a movie review.
Let's just say that once the narrative concludes, von Trier
gives us an "epilogue" that confounds all expectations. The
last moments of this film are by far the most challenging,
and after some reflection I've decided that without them --
the final shot in particular -- BREAKING THE WAVES would
simply be an extraordinary film. As is, it's a great one.
Without resort to mere words, von Trier breaks the bounds of
narrative and presents a resolution that's as troublesome as
it is fulfilling. In a bold refutation of its own grim,
nearly sardonic logic, BREAKING THE WAVES cuts to the quick
of religious faith, personal sacrifice, and human existence.

Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
In the very first shot of Trainspotting, a good-looking Scot with
close-cropped hair and his gawkier sidekick are running like hell through
the streets of Edinburgh, a pair of security guards in close pursuit and
Iggy Pop's percussive "Lust For Life" pumping on the soundtrack. The
imagery and sound are absolutely perfect, characterizing the film's
headlong, nihilistic style in its very first moments of action. In
voiceover, Mark Renton (Ewan McGregor) is taking a sidelong gander at his
options for clean living. "Choose life," he drawls almost playfully in a
thick Scottish brogue.  "Choose a job. Choose a career. Choose a family.
Choose a fucking big television, choose washing machines, cars, compact
disc players, and electrical tin openers." 
He's mocking the bourgeois lifestyle, of course, concluding, "Choose life
.... Why would I want to do a thing like that?" Casting aspersions on
notions of a normal life, Trainspotting is a deliciously entertaining and
only vaguely depressing show that presses thumb to nose throughout its 93
minutes. The film is eager to shock and sicken, but it takes such a keen
interest in character -- and its performances are so surefooted -- that
even as it dives headlong into the murky toilet water of the Scottish drug
culture, Trainspotting emerges triumphant, a cockeyed grin plastered
across its face. 
In Irvine Welsh's celebrated novel, director Danny Boyle and screenwriter
John Hodge find the humanity that eluded their previous effort, Shallow
Grave.  It was hard to really care about the characters in that film, a
trio of greedheaded flatmates who destroy themselves for the love of
money. It may have seemed an even more formidable task to penetrate the
unlovable patina of heroin-addled youth, but Hodge's smart, compact
screenplay, coupled with winning performances by McGregor, Ewan Bremner
(Spud, Renton's cohort in the opening scene), Jonny Lee Miller (the
weirdly charming Sick Boy), and Robert Carlyle (Begbie, who's sort of
Scotland's answer to a Joe Pesci character), makes for a downright
charming picture. 
Renton is the smartest of these unapologetic junkies, and the film's
subjective center. We watch through his eyes as he and his mates tie off
and shoot up, and we process thoughts along with him as he ruminates on
the meanings of life and death, the severity of his cravings, and the
place of his fellow Scotsmen in the world. "I hate being Scottish," he
rants in a rare moment of social consciousness. "I don't hate the
English-they're just wankers. We, on the other hand, are colonized by
wankers." McGregor's delivery is easily hilarious, but the true feelings
that it suggests boil well under the surface of this film, as does much
situational unpleasantness. 
Trainspotting's stylish gloss is hardly realistic, and its portrayal of
addiction is nearly as glamorous as the film's detractors may have you
believe-but it's not a glamour without consequences. We see the deaths
that are brought on by all this nihilistic cavorting, and the film's
centerpiece is a nightmarish, surreal drama of overdosing and kicking the
habit, set to the longing strains of Lou Reed's glam-era "Perfect Day" and
some truly disturbing imagery that could have been nicked from Jan
Svankmajer. (The overdose itself actually reminds me of the funeral
procession from Carl-Theodor Dreyer's Vampyr.)
What really gives Trainspotting credibility is its close relationship with
the body. Needle tracks, accidental and deliberate bloodshed, casual sex
with schoolgirls, and explosive diarrhea are all part of the tableau.
Understanding that you can't make a movie about the pleasures and pains of
drug addiction without seeking intimacy with the body that feels the rush,
Boyle's camera gets close to McGregor's starmaking performance, going so
far as to set one flatulent scene in "the worst toilet in Scotland." 
You may well be wondering how I can use words like hilarious and charming
to describe such a picture. The simple answer is that Trainspotting is
brilliant and audacious filmmaking. Trainspotting helps you understand the
lure of the heroin culture by introducing a gang of addicts who are
affable and charming and addicted to a rush that's described as superior
to a thousand grade-A orgasms. These kids seem to be victims of
circumstance and class struggle as much as anything (again, such concerns
are left to flow well below surface level), and there's a simple vicarious
thrill to be had by the audience in sharing their outlaw lifestyle. I
wouldn't want to be Mark Renton, but I surely wish him well. 
Even so, there are audiences who will find this all to be a little much,
and who might characterize the humor or its attending sentiments as
"sick." They would do well to stay away. Others may well be put off by the
lack of any strong female characters -- the most prominent is Diane (Kelly
MacDonald), playing jailbait, and she's in the film for about five
minutes. (Somebody obviously identified the "boys club"  angle as a
marketing waterloo, since ads feature MacDonald prominently even though
she's a decidely minor character whose best scenes were cut before
release.) Again, it's good to know what you're getting into before you buy
your ticket.  Trainspotting is a vein-tapping, shite-slinging, loo-diving
virtuoso piece -- and it's best recommended to folks who aren't timid
about that sort of thing. They'll be rewarded. 

Title
Review for Belle de jour (1967)
     One of my favorite unanswered questions in all of the movies is
this: What does the Japanese client keep in his box in BELLE DE JOUR?
     A little background is in order, in case you've never seen the
film. Belle de Jour is a definitive statement on eroticism, and a
deeply personal experience.  Catherine Deneuve gives a flat yet
evocative performance as Severine Sevigny, a virginal newlywed whose
everyday life is broken up by masochistic fantasies in which she's
beaten, smeared with filth, and humiliated by a variety of men. Her
husband, Pierre, seems gentle and loving, but Severine remains in
thrall to the idea of less wholesome relationships. When Severine
probes one of her husband's friends for information, he gives her the
address of a Parisian brothel catering to businessmen. Severine dons
black hat, coat, and sunglasses, and wanders through the neighborhood,
finally working up the courage to enter the establishment, where Madame
Anais agrees to let her work as a prostitute (Severine is just the
right type, she says -- fresh and classy). Because Severine is
insistent that she must be free to leave by evening, Anais christens
her Belle de Jour.
     The remainder of the film is broken into episodes, as Severine
confronts new and different clients while living a second life at
home.  For the most part, the customers are vaguely repulsive
caricatures: the fellow who fancies himself a ladies' man, and forces
himself clumsily on her; "the Professor," a mousy gynecologist who
insists on being scolded, whipped, and trod upon. More intriguing is
the Japanese businessman who carries with him a small box. He shows the
contents to one of the other two prostitutes, who snaps "Not for me,
thanks," and turns away in a hurry. When Severine peeks inside, her
eyes grow wide and we hear a soft whirring noise.  "Don't be afraid,"
she is urged.
     When the man leaves, closing the latch once more on his little
box, Severine lies spent, stretched across the bed as the maid tidies
her room. She confides to Severine her understanding of what the
prostitutes go through; even the maid finds men like the Japanese
client somewhat frightening. Severine looks up from the bed with an
expression of exhaustion and bliss. "What do you know?" she spits.
     Director and co-screenwriter Luis Bunuel is one of the most
subversive of filmmakers.  His career began in 1939, with UN CHIEN
ANDALOU (An Andalusian Dog), a classic of Surrealism that he made with
artist Salvador Dali. The first scene featured a razor blade slicing
sideways across a woman's (actually an animal's) eyeball. That most
offensive of all images, which creates an uproar to this day whenever
it's shown to a classroom full of first-year film students, is a
challenge to viewers, renewed with each project in Bunuel's long
career. Here, he seems to be at first challenging us to identify with
Severine and her deviances, convincing us to distance ourselves from
them, and ultimately to examine our own responses to her situation.
     Bunuel is aided and abetted in this perverse venture by Sacha
Vierny, the cinematographer who worked with Alain Resnais on NIOGHT AND
FOG, HIROSHIMA, MON AMOUR, and LAST YEAR AT MARIENBAD, and who has
lately been salvation for British filmmaker Peter Greenaway, whose
films take divine advantage of Vierny's cool, stately image- making. A
good deal of BELLE DE JOUR's quiet power comes from the mannered beauty
of its compositions, as Vierny catches the light on Deneuve's face just
so.
     Eventually, Severine pays a terrible price for pursuing her
aberrant fantasies, and the film could almost be a treatise on the
importance of prudence and fidelity. It's tempting to assume that
Bunuel is blaming Severine for giving in to her own desires and
betraying her husband -- blaming Woman for the ruin of Man. Perhaps he
is, but it's maddening to try and prove it. The movie is quite clearly
Severine's story, not Pierre's. Her status as perpetrator of a misdeed
is undermined by her status as a tragic hero (which is bolstered as
Bunuel goes out of his way to develop Severine's character). What's
important isn't what Deneuve gives away in her low-key performance, but
what she doesn't show -- the essence that the audience itself has to
fill in. Typically, the director gives us something more intriguing and
revealing than a simple narrative. Bunuel plays our own judgmental
tendencies against our desire for erotic satisfaction, and leaves us in
a quandary.
     Which brings us back to one of the great questions of the
cinema.  What's in the Asian client's box is the same thing that's in
Quentin Tarantino's PULP FICTION briefcase. It's the MacGuffin from a
dozen different Hitchcock films. Judging from the look on Deneuve's
face as she recovers from its effects, it may be, like the Maltese
Falcon, the stuff dreams are made of.
     But as far as dreams go, it's the stuff that's outside the
frame that matters. Our own moral scheme, shaped by personal loves,
regrets, and fantasies, surrounds and permeates Bunuel's deliberately
ambiguous value system. Like Greta Garbo's at the climax of QUEEN
CHRISTINA, Deneuve's face is a mask, and also a receptor for our own
emotions. The final truth of this film is that we are forced to do our
own moralizing, if we feel it needs to be done -- no matter how
skillful the intrusion of Bunuel as auteur, Severine's life-changing
experience is unmistakably a function of our own.

Title
Review for Angels and Insects (1995)
        Near the beginning of ANGELS & INSECTS, our romantic protagonist
courts the object of his very sexual affections in odd fashion. That
scene, which involves a veritable swarm of butterflies and moths crawling
across the woman's clothing and skin, is a good indicator of the film's
ambitions. Putting a Victorian estate under the microscope, ANGELS &
INSECTS postulates that this family unit, with sons, daughters and
servants all tending slavishly to the needs of a bloated matriarch, is
something less sophisticated and more distasteful than your average
backyard ant farm. 
        William Adamson (Mark Rylance) is an outsider among the
blueblooded Alabasters, the family whose patriarch, Sir Harald (Jeremy
Kemp), rescued the young naturalist from a disastrous shipwreck. He is
allowed to live with the Alabasters as Harald's assistant, and swiftly
falls under the spell of the oldest daughter, Eugenia (Patsy Kensit). 
This courtship among the insects is the film's most direct metaphor, and
its most satisfying conceit. As William confesses his love to Eugenia, he
looses upon her what first seem to be the world's loveliest butterflies.
But soon, Eugenia is beset by the unsightly male counterparts to the
beautiful females, which crawl across her body, drawn by female
pheromones. 
        The trauma of that experience isn't enough to derail the romance,
which unfolds to the chagrin of Eugenia's brother, Edgar (Douglas
Henshall), who considers William an unfit suitor.  Edgar's sneering
insults grow more and more provocative, but William resists his verbal
exhortations to physical battle and marries Eugenia. His assimilation into
the family is thus made literal, and Harald seems rather fond of the young
man -- but Edgar won't let up, spouting continually about how little
William knows of the world, and the significance of his improper breeding. 
        This socio-scientific Darwinism is as much a key to ANGELS &
INSECTS as are the butterfly and ant-farm metaphors (when Eugenia proves
herself to be less than an ideal lover, William bides his time with a
detailed study of an ant colony on the estate). For the first hour or so,
I was sitting on the edge of my seat, gamely tracking all of the asides,
double entendres, and allegorical declamations. Philip Haas's screenplay
tries to cram all the thematic concerns of its source material (the
novella MORPHO EUGENIA, by retroVictorian scribe A.S. Byatt) into the
two-hour space of a feature film, but it's a little much. 
        Those concerns spill over from the story and dialogue into the
film's visual grammar, as well. While the overall production design is
sumptuous and striking, the movie's infatuation with its own color sceme
grows tiring. For instance, when Kensit turns up in one of her
show-stopping gowns, an unlikely peacock blue fringed in blood red, the
effect is an imperfect distillation of the Peter Greenaway Effect-decidely
garish in appearance, but relatively graceless in execution.  More
effective for my money is the less specific sense of dread that infuses
the proceedings, especially in the scenes leading up to the marriage of
the unlikely lovers. 
        So maybe it's because the film wore me out in its first section
that I found the second half fairly tedious. It's mostly a waiting game.
We know that Kristin Scott Thomas (she plays Matty Crampton, the family
tutor) gets billing above Kensit, so her role will soon become prominent.
The ad campaign has assured us that there's a "startling"  revelation in
the final reels, but the punch is telegraphed across most of the movie.
And, of course, we know that something's got to give -- and it does. 
        That having been said, the movie does have its tremendous
pleasures. The performances are decidedly less mannered than we've come to
expect from costume drama, and Rylance and Henshall make deliciously
credible intellectual adversaries. I'll even go out on a limb for Kensit,
whose vaguely unsettling concupiscent charms have never before been put to
such perfect use. The cinematography is lush and surprising, and the
atmosphere is boldly creepy. 
        The opening credits sequence, which flash back to Adamson and a
troupe of Amazonian dancers frolicking in the firelight, is more honestly
sexual than anything that follows, and we get the sense that he was never
happier than he was among the natives (as if to underscore the point, the
titular letters spelling out "Angels" cross the screen in front of the
dancers). This sequence, beautifully edited by the director's wife,
Belinda Haas, helps us understand the libidinous freedom that Adamson
craves, even as he takes a luscious wife in an ostensible paradise. While
the inhabitants of a less seething Victorian tableaux might negotiate
apparently charmed paths to a satisfying but unlikely happy ending, we are
made to grow more and more certain that the only resolution to the
Victorian dilemma postulated by ANGELS & INSECTS is escape. 
