Authors
neekorz@iquest.com (roncreel)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Nine Months (1995)
     Hugh Grant and Julianne Moore passed up CONGO to do NINE MONTHS,
and that was a good move, because CONGO could have halted Grant's
career and possibly destroyed Moore's.  Instead they decided to do
Chris (MRS. DOUBTFIRE) Columbus's mildly entertaining comedy about a
husband who impregnates his girlfriend of five years and then decides he
doesn't really want the baby--but she does.  When he misses an
ultrasound appointment, Moore decides to raise the baby herself, and
moves in with friends of hers.  Well, guess what, this is just when
Hugh decides he wants the baby.  She won't talk to him, but when he
visits her in the hospital after a minor incident and explains his
situation to her, she takes him back just like that, and they marry
Then the birth occurs, and on a wild ride to the hospital, a bit of
real life irony occurs, when a sleazy waitress Grant almost slept with
but didn't has to ride with them to the hospital because she cut her
hand.  But Hugh couldn't resist that type of sleazy woman in real
life!  Despite some funny moments, especially the scenes with Robin
Williams, who plays an immigrant doctor who's first delivery is Grant
and Moore's (too bad no other character could be this humorous), this
is just an average comedy.  But some strong supporting performances
will help this one out (Jeff Goldblum and Tom Arnold are delightful).
This movie will be a mild box office success though, unless Hugh
Grant's womanizing will halt it.  Rating: C+
