Authors
Amanda Miller
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast (1991)
     Okay.  Here it is.  One of the best Disney flicks out in a while.
More than comparable to THE LITTLE MERMAID.  The songs aren't quite as
good, but at least they stay more in tune with the original story,
(unlike the happy ending, sugary sweet version of Hans Christian
Andersen's "The Littlest Mermaid").  I must say my interest was captured
and held so fast that I didn't even notice the brats sitting next to
me.  I give this movie a sparkling five stars!
     The voice of Belle is played by the same girl from THE LITTLE
MERMAID, and the character much better shows her talents and reaches
for singing and acting.  Unlike Ariel, Belle is very intelligent, loves
her father, and would do anything for him.  She is also an avid
bookworm, which I thought was an excellent touch for Disney.  The Beast
is unbelievably powerful, and just rips your heart in two with his love.
Also, all of the "little" servants are just about the cutest thing
Disney has ever thought of, and I must say that the candlestick is my
favorite.
     Now for the best part.  The songs themselves aren't as good, but
remember the movies like PETE'S DRAGON and POLLYANNA where everybody
danced together through the city streets while singing?  Well, now
that's in the animation also.  They really do a good job with it, too.
And for you computer buffs out there, Disney has finally made the switch
to computer animation in their movies!  The landscape scenes are in a
form of 3-D, they have the stuff in the foreground fuzzy as if it was
filmed by a camara that was focused on the things in the distance.  Now
for the biggy about the computer animation in it.  Gotta go see it for
yourself, but I will tell you that they use texture-mapping digitized
effects and entire objects that is run off of the video toaster for the
Amiga computer.  Cool, huh?
