Authors
Bernie Rauscher
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Singles (1992)
     I saw the move SINGLES last week, and I liked it ... as
entertainment.  I though the cosmetic surgery CAD (Computer Aided
Design) station was a blast.  I really liked the main characters keeping
their word on the "water date."  I thought the rock club scenes really
hit home with it being *impossible* to have a discussion, and the
characters being just a little bit out of it in the sea of obviously
just a tad over 21 crowd.
     All that aside, though, I thought the group of characters were an
interesting mix, --that wasn't exploited at all.  In Chicago, the
waitress-and-musician crowd and the suit-and-tie crowd are like oil and
water.  It's the same in Washington D.C. and New York.  Yet, both
groups come from very similar middle class backgrounds (to myopicly
focus on the class depicted in the movie).  Some of the rift is a simple
matter of money, i.e., Fonda's and Dillon's characters shouldn't have
been living in the "nice" part of town.  But, part of the rift is a
matter of choice and what people want out of life.  Given that the
characters were deciding what they were going to do with their lives, it
would it would have been interesting to see what went into those
choices.
     Also, given that they'd been living with these choices for a few
years, they could have explored the pros and cons of each.  The working
characters should have obviously had less free time and more constraints
on their lifestyle than their "non-working" friends.  The "non-working"
friends should have been obviously poorer in very real ways (like not
having their own roommate-less upscale apartments).
     The working characters had the life style one would expect, which
is the usual payback for a "professional" job.  But, Dillon was
talentless and Fonda was adrift.  This is not usually the case.  It
would have been better to have given either Fonda or Dillon some real
(though not necessarily marketable) talent.
