Authors
Charles QUINN
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Roger & Me (1989)
     "You know when they send you flowers?  They send you flowers when you
die."  - An autoworker after being laid off in Flint, Michigan.
     Hold the flowers--Michael Moore is alive and well.  Alive and well due to
the success of his first film, ROGER & ME.
     Roger (Roger Smith, the chairman of General Motors) & Me (Moore) is the
story of a boy and his town, and how the town goes from boom to bust.  It is
also the story of the reaction the town has to going bust, both by the people
affected, and the people responsible.  But above everything else, it is the
story of Michael Moore's attempt to bring Roger Smith to Flint Michigan to see
what his decision to close eleven factories, and lay off 35,000 people has done
to the town in Smith's backyard.
     Under normal circumstances, this would not be the stuff that an
entertaining movie would be based on.  In fact, most people would probably
prefer a root canal to seeing the suffering of families being evicted from
their homes on Christmas Eve, and the skinning of a rabbit.  But, to fall into
that trap would be to underestimate the acid wit of Michael Moore.
     Returning to Flint after a very brief stint as editor of MOTHER JONES in
California, Moore discovers that Flint is going downhill at an alarming rate.
General Motors is starting to close some of its factories in order to move them
to Mexico where the labour is cheaper.  Unfortunately the factories keep on
closing until they are all gone.
     Well, almost all.  Moore takes pains to point out that there still is a
single factory left, but it is making lint rollers.  Not exactly automobiles,
but "At least people's clothes will be lint free."
     It is this ability to point out the absurdity that abounds when corporate
America has gone wrong that make this film not only entertaining, but
enlightening.  
     The film's strongest point is its ability to cut back and forth between
the affluent and the destitute.  One minute he will be showing street after
street of vacant houses to the Beach Boy's "Wouldn't it be Nice."  And in the
next minute having Anita Bryant, the Orange Juice Queen, tell us that there is
a lot that America has to be proud of - though she is only able to think of
"Freedom, and sunshine."  
     Not willing to rest, Moore keeps on going at a frantic pace.  He tries to
visit Smith's office, and after being told that Smith is currently unavailable,
Moore shows us the desperation of some families being evicted by deputy Fred
(who Moore points out is actually a nice guy, and is fortunate to have a job --
however unpleasant it might be.)  Then, without a breath, he cuts to a group of
ladies playing golf, who feel that there really is not a problem in Flint,
except that there are a few too many lazy people.  "They could find jobs if
they wanted to."  Then it is back to more families being thrown out by deputy
Fred, this time with the General Motors chorus singing Christmas carols ("You'd
Better Watch Out") in the background.
     By the end, Moore has not been able to talk with Smith, much less convince
him to visit Flint.  However, this does not mean that Moore has given up.  In
an unusual agreement with the distributors, Warner Brothers and Famous Players
have agreed to leave a seat empty at every screening.  This is just in case
Smith ever decides that he wants to see the result of his actions in his own
back yard.  
     Which of course is the whole point to the movie, that this can happen in
our own back yard, and that if it does that we should not shun the problem.
Rather, as Roger & Me urges, we should attack it.  Unfortunately, if you count
the slashing of VIA rail, the closing of numerous fish plants in Atlantic
Canada, and the closing of several automobile factories in Southern Ontario
(one of which is ironically being moved to Flint), we can see that Moore is
right.  It can happen here, and in fact, it is.
