Authors
eric walker
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Husbands and Wives (1992)
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES stands to be Woody Allen's biggest hit, thanks
to the supposed parallels between this movie and the much- publicized
real-life affair between Woody and Mia Farrow's adopted daughter.
TriStar Pictures is cashing in on the controversy by promoting this
movie a lot more than they would normally advertise Woody's pictures,
and they're giving it a much wider release than usual.  As a result,
many people are going to see a Woody Allen movie for the first
time--they may have heard of ANNIE HALL and SLEEPER and CRIMES AND
MISDEMEANORS, and they may know that Woody refuses to take part in the
Academy Awards process and he plays the clarinet every year instead of
going to the ceremony, but that's all they know about him.  And now
they're going to see HUSBANDS AND WIVES, out of curiosity more than
anything else.
     I think people will find themselves forgetting about Woody Allen
and Mia Farrow when they watch that movie, because they'll be too busy
enjoying the drama unfolding on the screen before them.  This may be one
of Woody's best films--it gives us some of the most deeply developed,
interesting characters in his films so far, full of the nuances and the
failures that make them ordinary human beings like you and me.  While
the characteristic Woody Allen angst and philosophy of life is there,
the movie doesn't wallow in it--rather, it's used to flesh out the story
and make us believe it all the more.  The principal characters in this
story aren't even Woody and Mia, even though they're given the obvious
top billing.  This is really the story of Jack and Sally, played by
Sidney Pollack and Judy Davis.  They're the best friends of Gabe and
Judy (Woody and Mia), and the movie begins with them marching into
Gabe's apartment and casually announcing that they're splitting up.
     Gabe and Judy can't believe this, because they've been friends with
these two for all of their lives, and it comes as a complete shock.
Well, maybe not that much of a shock--for as the movie progresses, we
see how Jack and Sally essentially became fed-up with each other over
the year.  It's always the little things that build up over time--the
subtle criticisms of each other, the white lies that grow into bigger
lies--and finally these two decide that they want to try living on their
own for a while.
     Meanwhile, Gabe and Judy are going through their own mid-life
crisis.  Here's where the movie ventures into territory first charted in
ANNIE HALL and MANHATTAN, but this isn't just a retread of those movies.
It could easily tell those stories over again, but in fact it's just a
backdrop to the story of Jack and Sally.  Woody Allen's eternal
pessimistic has been fleshed out so well over the years that we're not
really watching his betrayal of his wife (as he slowly falls for
19-year-old Juliette Lewis) as we're seeing an old friend tell a
favorite story one more time.  It's a favorite story because we know how
it's going to end, and it's not really happening to us.  This has always
been Woody Allen's appeal: he's the Charlie Brown of the movies.  He
takes all of our own fears and anxieties and plays them out for us,
making us laugh so that we don't share his depression as we're feeling
sorry for him.  And the romance between Gabe (Woody) and little Rain
(Juliette Lewis)?  It's interesting in that it's a part of the
archetypal Woody Allen story, though Rain could just as easily be a
45-year-old woman instead of a 19-year-old college student.  Lewis'
character is very mature for her age, as she suffered from a few
traumatic relationships of her own when she was younger.  The movie's
funniest moment comes when Rain is telling Gabe about her previous
affairs, while Gabe just sits there with a classic Woody Allen look on
his face.  It's a delight.
     Aside from the "romantic" angle of Gabe's affair with Rain, I
suspect that much of the uneasy feeling that this is real life we're
seeing here comes from the way the movie is shot.  Hand-held cameras are
often used, giving us the feeling that we're right there with the
characters on the screen, looking over their shoulders and interacting
with them instead of merely watching them from our seats in the theatre.
It's a way of breaking the "fourth wall" of the movies, breaking down
the barrier between fiction and reality, and this adds to the movie's
entrancing effect.
     Furthermore, the film is structured in a quasi-documentary style,
in which the characters are "interviewed" in "Annie Hall" fashion;
there's even narration by the unseen interviewer as he probes into their
pasts and coaxes their deepest secrets from them.  In fact, the
interviewer is us--he's asking the questions that we want to ask, and
he's the one poking into their private lives with his camera.  (The
film's editing adds to this effect, as it occasionally jumps from one
moment to the next in the style of home movies.)
     If you go to see HUSBANDS AND WIVES expecting a detailed look into
Woody Allen's real-life affair, then you will probably be disappointed.
But don't let this stop you from seeing this film: as a slice-of-life,
realistic look into the lives of a quartet of New York characters, this
is one of Woody's best.

Title
Review for Unforgiven (1992)
NOTE: Spoilers for the movie UNFORGIVEN appear below.  Normally I try
to reveal as little of the movie's plot as possible, but this time I
want to do more than simply say what a good movie it is.
    With the release of Clint Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN, the American
Western has returned to the movies with a vengeance.
    One might say that John Wayne's THE SHOOTIST marked the end of an
era, as the mythic, larger-than-life Old West came to a close.  Despite
several attempts to "revitalize" the genre, from the disastrous HEAVEN'S
GATE to PALE RIDER (in which Eastwood himself emulated Alan Ladd's
Shane) to SILVERADO, the Western was effectively dead and buried in
Hollywood.  YOUNG GUNS and its sequel managed to make a quick buck off
of the popularity of its "brat pack" cast, but those movies could hardly
live up to the standards set by the likes of John Ford and Sergio Leone.
    But seemingly from out of nowhere, Kevin Costner pulled off the coup
of the decade with DANCES WITH WOLVES.  This shamelessly politically-
correct movie was entertaining in its own right, and it proved that even
the Hollywood Western could be recreated in the era of the 1990s.  More
importantly, it was a smash box-office hit.  Hollywood looked up and
realized that yes, people *do* still watch Westerns.
    Flash-forward to 1992.  Ron Howard makes FAR AND AWAY, and he also
bows to the gods of Political Correctness.  FAR AND AWAY was a light
and fluffy folk tale that tried to be an "epic saga."  It succeeded on
the popcorn level, but failed to achieve anything higher than that.
    A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, the movie that made Eastwood a star, proved
to be the death knell of the Classical Western of good-and- bad.  The
so-called "spaghetti Westerns" reflected the way America's tastes in
movies were changing in the 1960s, as they sought to de-mythify the
Western and bring it down to earth.  Now, with UNFORGIVEN, Eastwood once
again makes a name for himself, and once again he brings the Western to
another level.
    Eastwood plays the role of Bill Munny, a grizzled old retired
gunfighter who has settled down to raise hogs with his two children.
Everything seems peaceful, though he doesn't seem very happy.  What's
more, he doesn't seem to be having much luck as a homesteader.  His wife
died three years ago, and the hogs are coming down with fever.
    But then along comes a young man calling himself the "Schofield
Kid."  He's heard about a $1,000 reward being offered by a small-town
brothel for killing two men, and he's looking for a partner to help him
do it.  Munny had quite a reputation as a gunfighter, and so he's
offered the role.  He accepts.
    During the first half or so of the movie, Munny keeps repeating how
he's no longer a killer the way he used to be - his wife changed all
that.  This is, in fact, only partially true: Munny has mellowed with
age, but he was born to be a gunfighter, and we know that his attempts
to convince everyone that he's not a killer are only half-hearted.
    In fact, Munny's return to way of the gun marks more than his own
return - it's symbolic of the way the Western genre itself has come back
to claim its former place.  The gunfighter has returned from retirement,
but he's not the man he used to be.  The old gunfighter with the white
hat of the Golden Age of Hollywood is history; today's gunfighter is a
complex, struggling figure who is anything but the good Paladin of old.
    This story deliberately takes every Western cliche and turns it on
its side.  Notice the way the movie pokes fun at the classic scenes of
target practice, where the gunfighter shoots at a can sitting on a log;
or the ease with which the gunfighter can mount his horse and be off in
a matter of microseconds; or the way a man can fall from his horse and
suffer only a few scratches.  Sometimes the revisions are so deliberate
that they stand out from the rest of the movie, as in one scene where
Eastwood reaches behind a bar to get a bottle of whiskey to smash his
attacker's face; but this never detracts from the story as a whole.
Every scene, every line has its purpose.
    But despite these little in-jokes, Eastwood achieves far more than a
mere parody of the Western.  All of the characters in UNFORGIVEN are
richly developed, with their own sets of morals and their own ideals of
right and wrong.  The entire movie is set in the grey area of morals, so
that we don't really know who is right and who is wrong.
    The story begins when two cowboys participate in the shame of a
prostitute, slashing her face so that she can no longer work.  Her
fellow ladies are outraged at the way her plight is heartlessly treated
by the Sherriff, and so they offer a $1,000 reward to the people who can
come into town and kill the two men.  But it's not as simple as that.
The question is raised: is the scarring of a woman worth the lives of
two men?  She was cruelly treated and the men deserved to be punished,
but is killing them the right answer?  In fact, when one of the two men
tries to make amends above and beyond the payment he is forced to give
(he tries to give the woman his best pony), his gesture of apology is
literally thrown back into his face.
    The morals question is also reflected in the Sherriff, Little Bill
Daggett (played to perfection by Gene Hackman).  He knows that in a
frontier town such as this one (its name is "Big Whiskey"), he must rule
with an iron hand - and he honestly believes that he is keeping law and
order in town.  He enforces a code that requires all visitors to the
town to turn their guns over to him - a rule that he hopes will keep any
bounty hunters from trying to claim the reward.  We see how he enacts
his "justice" on one such hopeful, a gentlemanly chap named English Bob
who turns out to be no gentleman.  He beats and kicks Bob almost to
death - but he does so as a warning to other potential trouble-makers.
In the harsh times of the Western frontier, his cruel way of sending
this "message" may actually be justified, because he's doing it to a
would-be murderer who wants to kill a person he is sworn to protect.
    In a similar fashion, Little Bill takes time out to explain the lack
of morality on the Frontier to a traveling writer, W. W. Beauchamp.
This man was formerly English Bob's companion, but he decides to hang
around Little Bill because Bill wants to tell him "the truth" as opposed
to Bob's wild stories.  In UNFORGIVEN, W. W. actually represents us, the
viewing audience.  For many a year, we've seen Westerns that portray the
Wild Wild West as a fantasy land of justice and morals, where the Good
Guys play fair and the Bad Guys always win in the end.  W. W. is writing
a silly book that romanticizes English Bill's exploits, describing them
in a fashion that we've heard in the classic Westerns.  But Little Bill
tells W. W. what it's "really" like to be a gunfighter, and he blasts
the myth of the Old West to pieces.  As W. W. learns what a harsh and
dangerous place the West can be, so to do we ourselves learn that there
is no true "Right" and "Wrong" in the realistic world of the new
Hollywood Western.
    I haven't touched the main characters yet.  There's the "Schofield
Kid," who plays the role of the brash, boastful young wannabe
gunfighter.  He learns the harsh lesson that killing your first man is
never what you think it will be, but in UNFORGIVEN it affects him as it
never did in the Westerns of old.  He reminded me a lot of the sassy
young kid in RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY, even to the point where he's only
interested in the reward money.  But he learns that money isn't
everything.
    Morgan Freeman plays Ned Logan, Bill Munny's old partner who has
also retired from gunfighting.  While he's also willing to get back on
the saddle and earn a piece of the reward, it seems that retirement has
taken its toll on him.  He's the only one in the movie who has a
distinct, clear set of morals - but this is only more proof that
Eastwood's purpose in this movie was to kill off the simplistic ideals
of the Classic Western once and for all.
    It's with Ned Logan's character that Eastwood makes his only bow
towards political correctness: not once in the movie is the fact that
Ned is black mentioned.  On one hand, this is a good move on Hollywood's
part, but on the other hand it subtracts slightly from the realistic
feel of the movie - after all, the 19th Century was as racist a time as
ever there was, here in America.  The problem here is with the ultimate
fate of Ned Logan: does this constitute the Hollywood cliche of once
again killing off a major black character in the cast, while the white
guys live on to the end of the movie?  Ned's death is an important plot
twist, and it's certainly essential to the story.  But casting Morgan
Freeman in this role called my attention once again to the way blacks
are portrayed in Hollywood movies.  Or am I merely overreacting?
    Mention must be made of the movie's superb direction as well.
Despite its length (2 hours and 10 minutes seems to be the new Hollywood
"epic" standard - *just* longer than the length of a typical two-hour
videotape), this movie will keep you mesmerized from beginning to end.
     The Frontier of UNFORGIVEN is a lonely place, where a cold wind
blows day and night and the sky is often overcast.  I remember seeing a
sunny scene exactly three times in this movie: the very beginning and
the very end (both of which are sunsets), and once during the middle of
the movie where the scarred prostitute is talking to Bill Munny.  Rain
figures prominently in this movie, contrasting to the hot desert
locations where most of the classic Westerns were filmed.
     If you go to see UNFORGIVEN expecting another action flick in the
order of A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, you will be sorely disappointed.  While
the movie does end with a shootout (vastly different from the standard
Hollywood Shootout Climax, however!), it's truly a drama of characters,
where what a person says and how he acts is far more important than what
he does and who he shoots.
     This a thinking person's Western.  If you hate Westerns, you will
fall under the harsh spell of UNFORGIVEN.  If you love Westerns, you
will never forget this one.  This is truly a movie for the ages, and
future movies will look back upon this one for inspiration and guidance.
