Authors
Kristian M Lin
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
        There's a detail near the end of "Con Air" that epitomizes
everything that's right and wrong with the movie.  The bad guys have crash
landed their plane on the Las Vegas Strip, and some of them commandeer a
fire truck to make good their escape.  U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin (John
Cusack) chases after them on a police motorcycle.  He shoots at them with
his gun until he runs out of bullets, upon which he, like many other
action heroes, throws his gun away.  He then catches up to the truck,
leaps aboard, grabs a hatchet, chops a hole in the roof of the cab and
tells the driver, a convict named Swamp Thing (M.C. Gainey) to pull over.
Swamp Thing just laughs at him.
        Now, if Larkin had been thinking like a regular person, he would
have held on to his empty gun and pointed it at Swamp Thing to get him to
pull over.  But this being an action movie, that wouldn't have been any
fun.  So, without his gun, Larkin has to grab a fire hose, poke it through
the hole in the roof and blast Swamp Thing into oblivion with it.  You
have to admit it's a nice visual.
        "Con Air" begins when Cameron Poe (Nicolas Cage), who killed a man
trying to rape his wife, receives his parole from prison.  He hitches a
ride aboard a plane loaded with insanely violent criminals.  Of course,
the criminals take over the plane, and Poe does his best to thwart their
plans.  Meanwhile, on the ground, Larkin figures out that Poe's a good guy
and tries to convince his colleagues of that before they blow the plane
out of the sky.
        It's easy to point out "Con Air's" many flaws.  Director Simon
West stuffs action into every frame until the movie wears on you.  Scott
Rosenberg's script tries way too hard to be hip and funny ("If you say
anything, the next wings you see will be on the flies buzzing around your
rotting corpse," a villain says rather tortuously).  The movie spends too
much time building up its bad guys, and there's so many of them that they
create a nightmare of loose ends.  The hero's got a family to come home
to, but he stays on the plane to keep the male guards from being killed,
the female guard from being raped, and a diabetic convict friend of his
from dying.  All this raises the film's B.S. quotient sky high.
        Still, I enjoyed this picture more than I expected to, and it has 
a lot to do with the cast.  Cage once again manages to play a virtuous
paragon without cloying.  Better still is John Malkovich as Cyrus "The 
Virus" Grissom, who becomes the prisoners' ringleader.  This movie shakes
Malkovich out of his recent torpor (see "Mary Reilly" or "The Portrait of
a Lady") and lets him unleash his ferocious side.
        On the downside, the brilliant Cusack in a cliched role becomes a
self-righteous bore (a quality he displayed, and sent up, in "Bullets
Over Broadway").  Steve Buscemi is all wrong as a psycho killer - his
criminal characters (in "Reservoir Dogs" and "Fargo," among others) are so
memorable because they try so hard to make sense out of everything.  This
actor shouldn't be unhinged.
        Anyway, it isn't likely that you'll go into "Con Air" with too
many illusions.  It's an action flick that fulfills one's modest
expectations.

Title
Review for East Side Story (1997)
        If it's playing in your area, you won't do any better for goofy,
surreal fun than "East Side Story," a documentary about musical films made
in Eastern Europe between 1934 and 1973.  Filled with hilarity both
intentional and unintentional, this wacky movie is "That's Entertainment!'
for the Warsaw Pact set.
        Directed by Dana Ranga and co-written by Ranga and Andrew Horn,
"East Side Story" intersperses clips of these movie rarities with
interviews of film historians, filmmakers, actors and audience members
familiar with them.  The interviews illustrate the film's thesis, which is
that moviemakers who tried to make musicals in the Communist system were
in an impossible bind.  Audiences loved these movies for the simple
pleasures of song, dance, and comedy.  The apparatchiks knew that the
masses had to be entertained, but musicals were threatening - they were
too frivolous, and their visual opulence glorified materialism.  The
bureaucrats vastly preferred that people see serious films about history
and social issues (one viewer describes attending these as "like a
national duty").
        It was hard to obtain official sanction to make a musical, and the
studios never saw the profits from the hits, so why bother?  This dilemma
even inspired one of the genre's biggest successes, a 1962 East German
entry called "Midnight Revue."  In it, a movie producer is so frustrated
in his attempts to film a musical that he kidnaps the country's leading
film director, scriptwriter, and composer, and holds them until they come
up with an idea for one.  The three men insist that it can't be done and,
naturally, burst into song and dance about the impossibility of making
musicals.
        With Hollywood musicals largely verboten in the Eastern bloc,
directors and performers had to learn the genre's ins and outs as they
went along.  Yet the film clips we see reveal a high level of singing and
dancing talent, and the visual elements have a real deftness and style
that wouldn't have embarrassed any Hollywood director.
        Nevertheless, you'll find it hard to believe much of what you see
(and hear, if you know German, Russian, or Czech).  That's because the
musical's generic conventions clashed with the dictates of socialist
aesthetics.  As the dryly funny narration explains, "Godard once said that
the history of film was the history of boys photographing girls.  But
Stalin had a different fantasy: boys photographing tractors."
        Thus, song lyrics like "Racka dacka, racka dacka, that's the song
of the coal press!"  Beaming, rosy-cheeked Russian field workers sing,
"Harvest, harvest, keep loading!  The quota has been attained!"  A couple
of Czech beauty parlor attendants harmonize, "No woman at a construction
site is thinking of her skin," while young women lying on massage tables
do choreographed routines and the masseuses pat them down in time to the
music.
        Of course, there's a dark subtext to this Communist musical
delirium.  Joseph Stalin's favorite movie was a musical called "Volga,
Volga."  Looking at that rollicking farce about singing boatmen, you'd
never guess that it was made during the worst period of Stalin's genocidal
campaign to remove potential enemies.  Perhaps, "East Side Story" 
suggests, finding something to sing and dance about in those dark times
was a sort of heroism.
        But the movie doesn't sell this too hard.  Instead, it uses
musicals to point up the socialists' failure to see how providing
consumers with entertainment (like the damned capitalist countries did)
could have served their own best interests.  One hysterical insight comes
from an East German sociology professor who sent his assistants to scour
Lenin's 38 volumes of collected writings to find what he wrote about
entertainment.  The answer: absolutely nothing.  As the narrator says,
"Who knows how things might have turned out if socialism had just been
more fun?"

Title
Review for Yapian zhanzheng (1997)
        "The Opium War" is a historical film set in the 1830s.  When the
Chinese government tried to ban opium, British opium dealers, who had
grown wealthy from their trade, persuaded Queen Victoria to go to war for
their business.  The result was a humiliating defeat for the Chinese, who
were forced to surrender Hong Kong to British control as part of the peace
settlement.
The movie follows two main characters.  Lin Zexu is the minister
designated by the emperor to wipe out the opium trade.  He's the only one
with the situation sized up, as his government ignores his advice and
vacillates in the face of the British threat.  On the other hand, He
Shinzhi, the son of a Chinese opium seller, survives the anti-drug
campaign through his knowledge of English, which allows him to work as an
interpreter in Chinese diplomatic business with England.
Writer/director Xie Jin is known in some circles as "the Chinese
Spielberg," and it's easy to see why.  "The Opium War" is an epic with 
solid plotting, judicious pacing, grand visuals, good acting, sentimental
melodrama, and nothing terribly complex.  The English are all villains in
various shades, and the heroes must fight the stupidity and corruption of
their colleagues and superiors as well as the enemy.  The film's release
in China was timed to coincide with the recent return of Hong Kong to
Chinese rule.  Ironically, "the Chinese Spielberg" has been trumped by the
American one, as Chinese moviegoers have largely neglected "The Opium War"
and flocked to see "The Lost World" instead.
The movie consistently holds your interest over its 2 1/2-hour
length, but there's only a couple of truly memorable scenes.  One is when
Lin hears rumors that his own deputies are using opium and abetting the
sellers.  He calls them to a meeting and asks if this is true, which they
all deny.  Lin then announces that everyone is going to stay in the room
and meditate for six hours.  The director Xie manages a tensely funny slow
burn as the deputies' withdrawal symptoms gradually grow worse and worse.
The other compelling bit comes at the end of the movie.  On his
way to exile, Lin meets Qishan, a minister who previously deposed him and
is now sentenced to death.  Lin gives Qishan a globe and asks him to
present it to the emperor before his execution.  "Tell him there are many
powerful countries in the world besides China," says Lin, looking much
sadder and wiser.  His homeland's complacency has been shattered, but he
still feels loss because China's illusion of cultural superiority was so
glorious (aided as it was by a righteous cause).  The emperor weeps in
front of portraits of his great predecessors, but only Lin comprehends the
inevitability of China's downfall as well as its scope.  For all the
movie's theatrics and cheap emotionalism, this is its one real moment of
resonance.  What has come before is a thoroughly conventional melodrama,
but this concluding glint of perspective gives it a few transcendent
minutes, which is more than many movies have.
Note: The opening and closing credits of the print I saw were in
Chinese, so I was unable to obtain the names of the principal actors
involved with the production.  My apologies.
