Authors
Phineas Narco
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
     It's a delicate matter writing a review for this movie because one
could say that going into it, the less you know the better, so I'll be
tip-toeing around plot points here, in fact I'm not going to say that
much about the story except the basics....
     Ever since PSYCHO came out in 1960, the insane serial killer
maniac has really taken the place of the likes of Frankenstein and
Dracula as our favorite boogey man.  There have been a TON of movies
since then done in this vein, some better than others.  All this ...
"coverage," both in real life and in fictional movies, has served to
desensitize those, to some extent, who have been paying attention to it
on a regular basis.  Would Norman Bates have caused such a sensation if
PSYCHO came out today?  Or would he be quickly relegated to the growing
ranks of somewhat more or less interesting murderous movie maniacs?
Would the world react the same to the Manson murders if they happened
in 1995?  Hannibal Lecter and his fava beans have become throwaway
lines in stand-up comedy routines, or spoofed in movie parodies.  In the
real world it took Jeffrey Dahmer and his almost unimaginably over the
top atrocities to get the public to even sit up and take notice.  It is
in the midst of this dreary, numbing state of complacency and
desensitization to the rising tide of horrors in the modern world that
John Doe starts his sermon/reign of terror and SEVEN unveils it's
morality play.
     Brad Pitt plays Detective David Mills, an idealistic, hyper and
impatient newcomer to an over-worked violence ridden city with no name
which he begged to be transferred to in the innocent hope of "making a
difference."  His first week on the job coincides with Detective
Somerset's (Morgan Freeman) last week on the job.  Somerset is burned
out, jaded, cynical, world-weary and despairing of ever making a
difference in the world.  Enter John Doe, a similarly no- named serial
killer who has taken it unto himself to preach to the world through a
string of grisly and sickeningly cruel murders, creative as they are
destructive ... each murder corresponds to one of the classic seven
deadly sins:  gluttony, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and wrath.
     Let me say that I kind of identify with Freeman's character's
position when it comes to horror movies of this sort, I've seen so many
of them that they hardly faze me anymore, but SEVEN had me just about
climbing onto my seat back many times.  Freeman does a great job in a
role that requires him to make his character real and sympathetic while
at the same time not emoting a whole hell of a lot.  He's able to
convey in his barely restrained outwardly calm demeanor how much this
case is getting under his skin.  Pitt is earning more and more of my
respect with each role he takes.  Unlike the other "Hollywood hunks"
which play it safe by taking roles of likable, heroic, handsome,
winning, charismatic leading men, Pitt has taken admirable chances
since his Calvin Klein pretty boy days of Thelma and Louise and taken
such roles as Early Grace in KALIFORNIA which made me sit up and take
notice of his acting range.  There's a key moment in SEVEN where the
camera closes in on his face as it goes through an agonizing second by
second vaccilation between extreme rage and profound grief and it's
devastating.  Pitt's character is out of his element here, full of
energy to go out and "do something" but not sure exactly what ...
there's a wonderful synergy between this and the by the book,
methodical, jaded, quiet and experienced approach of Somerset.  The
killer wants to make a difference too ... one of the faults of the plot
is that as it happens over the course of a few days, it doesn't really
allow Mills and Doe (the killer) a chance to develop any kind of
relationship ... perhaps they know each other only too well, or think
they do.  And perhaps this isn't a fault, but an avoidance of cliche
'the-anonymous-killer-over-the-phone' situation ala IN THE LINE OF
FIRE.  The value of this has been debated in the movie newsgroups but
without revealing anything about the ending, just let me say it's not
your typical big-battle-on-the-ledge-of-a-building-villain-falls-
down-and-gets-impaled-hero-cracks-a-wry-joke-and-walks-off-
with-the-girl hollywood type ending.  The ending in SEVEN, IMHO, was
brilliant, thought-provoking, devastating, certainly talk-provoking and
debatable ... perhaps it tips its hat a little early in some places, the
"moment of truth" comes during the crisis, at least *I* never really
knew for sure.  SEVEN's ending left me walking out of the theater
wide-eyed, light-headed and shaken.  Keep in mind that when it comes to
thriller/action movies, it's no small task to surprise audiences of any
intelligence at all, which why so many films are rife with cliche's
worn out formulas.  SEVEN has more than a few compelling twist and
turns up its sleeve.
     I wanted to say something about the "grisly goriness" that the
movie has a growing reputation as having.  SEVEN is a dark, disturbing,
depressing, nightmare-inspiring ride through a dark world of murder,
horror and madness that makes SILENCE OF THE LAMBS look like DUMBO, but
it's a thinking man's horror movie and one that was obviously created
patience and skill and well-roundedness of the script (whoever wrote it
should get an Oscar), acting and what the camera SHOWS.  When are
horror filmmakers going to realize that the real horror in these types
of movies is in what they DON'T show?!  (Or at least show very very
briefly).  You see this demonstrated in movies like PSYCHO where you
never see the knife touch flesh or in THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE, PULP
FICTION, IN COLD BLOOD, and to an extent HENRY-PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER and JAWS.  It's easy for a filmmaker to go for a gross-out
gore-ride, just leave the hard-work up to the make-up technician.
SEVEN has only ONE act of violence that happens ON CAMERA.  The rest
are horrifying aftermath murder tableaus that are brilliantly staged
but effectively shot in ways that we never get REALLY visually up close
to the horror for very long at a time.  And it's all the more intensely
effective because of this!!
     One last thing about the killer.  You don't "get" him at a glance,
he's an enigma, but an enigma with a purpose.  Pitt's character would
love to dismiss John Doe as a just some sick psycho.  Freeman warns him
against this and indeed it's hard to determine where Doe's madness ends
and where any kind of rational message begins.  That's the question
we're left to ponder at the end of this film.  I for one still am.

Title
Review for Speed (1994)
     I can just imagine the pitch for the new movie SPEED at some
Hollywood power lunch at Spago's: "Okay, picture IN THE LINE OF FIRE
meets DIE HARD.  A psycho bomber rigs a bus full of people so that if
it falls below 50 MPH it explodes.  We get Christian Slater or Keanu
Reaves for the lead, you know, someone young and virile, he has to keep
the bus running while trying to disarm the bomb."  SPEED is pure junk
food entertainment ... like a Snickers bar it's delicious and cloying
when you're eating it, yet virtually devoid of substance, nutrition and
credibility.  After you've come down from the initial sugar rush you
feel kind of empty and cheated, but only if you were expecting anything
more from it.
     That Spago power lunch HAD to have taken place at some point.  DIE
HARD meets IN THE LINE OF FIRE.  Keanu's hair (which keeps getting
shorter and shorter with each movie he makes--is he bald in LITTLE
BUDDHA?) is close-cropped like Bruce Willis' in DIE HARD.  Like IN THE
LINE OF FIRE there's a lot of verbal sparring over the phone with the
psycho and talk about "the game" and Keanu's partner (like Eastwood's
partner) gets ... well, you know ...  Unlike IN THE LINE OF FIRE, SPEED
doesn't spend much time on things like character and plot development,
it's too busy blowing things up ... and they blow up real good.
     Keanu plays Jack Traven who works on a bomb squad and points his
gun at every conceivable angle when entering a room while trying to
eradicate the last remnants of his valley-boy accent from the BILL AND
TED movies with a steady, macho baritone register ... along with Jeff
Daniels, his partner and in the movie's opening they are trying to save
an elevator full of people from plummeting thirty floors or so unless
Dennis Hopper, our resident psychopath, gets a few million dollars
delivered to him.  We're asked to believe that the police forget to
check the freight elevators in one of which Hopper's hanging out (how
he plans to collect the money, due in a few minutes, from this
clandestine vantage point is not explained).  Well, our belief is
suspended about as well as the elevator and it soon comes crashing down
as well but not before they rescue the hostages.  Reeves and Daniels
corner the psycho in the basement discovering that he's taped a dozen
sticks of dynamite to his torso all ready to blow.... Keanu utters such
inanities as: "Give it up, you've got nowhere to go!" while Hopper
takes Daniels hostage with a gun--why I don't know since he can blow all
three of them to Kingdom come.  Why Keanu shoots Daniels in the leg is
equally stupid, but then Hopper walks out the door (why he doesn't
shoot both of them is anybody's guess) and there is a huge explosion on
the other side.  How in the world Hopper survives the explosion is
simply never explained....  Well, that pretty much sets the tone for
the film, full of action and would-be suspense, and utterly
nonsensical.
     The main part of the film, of course, concerns the bus that can't
slow down or it will explode....  Matthew Broderick's buddy from FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF is one of the passengers, a tourist, sporting a deep
tan, and spends most of the movie rolling his eyes and muttering to
himself, probably wishing he was kicking a Ferrari through a plate
glass window instead of being on the "wrong bus."  There is some
chemistry between Jack and Annie (Sandra Bullock) who takes over as
driver of the runaway bus.  Bullock is good here but as the movie wears
on, our credulity is further stretched as their conversations become
flirty and casual as she drives along hardly glancing at the
speedometer or the road at some points.
     Meanwhile Hopper is monitoring all this action, ostensibly, from
the overhead television newscopters live footage on the local news.
Later we find out he's monitoring the action in another way in another
laughable revelation.  Hopper isn't that great of a psycho, he concedes
too much, he gives away too much information about himself in flagrant
clues to his would be victims.  We never *really* find out what Hopper's
beef is.  There's some talk about how he used to be a cop (again,
echoes of IN THE LINE OF FIRE), how he lost a finger and got put into
retirement and was pissed off cuz he got a gold watch.  So what?
Doesn't really add up to a motive for all the mayhem.  Keanu snarls his
lip while yelling things at him over the phone like:  "I'm going to rip
out your spine!"  (They got this line from THE RUNNING MAN).  Oh,
please!
     There are other problems.  Never mind the fact that it would be
logistically impossible to keep a bus at the speed limit on the Santa
Monica freeway for almost any length of time...  After a while they get
onto a highway under construction only to find out that two miles ahead
of them there is a fifty-foot stretch of highway that is simply not
there.  I almost laughed out loud at this sequence.  I thought for a
second that E.T. must be driving the bus because it literally *rises
up* of its own accord like Peter Pan.  We're not even given a long
shot of the bus making the jump from what I can remember ... you see the
bus take off then a shot of people screaming and being jostled around
inside the bus then you see the bus landing and driving on.  Perhaps
some physics major can demonstrate the impossibility of that stunt, but
you don't have to be one to see that the bus should have dropped like a
stone.  By this time I was wondering if they ever considered just
busting the glass on that speedometer and holding the needle all the way
to the right?
     They make it to an airport to drive around and around the
runways.  There is a truly great sequence (a la RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK)
where Keanu slides under the bus on a dolly while it speeds along
coming dangerously close to becoming road pizza.  This sequence just
about had me jumping into the row behind me.  I won't reveal the
physical impossibility of how Keanu and Bullock exit the bus at the end
but I could hear the audience members scoffing around me.  "Yeah,
right!"
     Well, every good action movie nowadays has to have at least two
climaxes and, of course, the obligatory mano-a-mano showdown and this
is no exception.  It takes place on the top of a subway car traveling
underground and is derivative of SILVER STREAK in more ways than one.
     SPEED seems to be another one in a long line of recent calculated
blockbusters that Hollywood has been churning out a lot of lately along
the lines of BATMAN RETURNS, CLIFFHANGER, JURASSIC PARK, and DEMOLITION
MAN ... movies that visually are wonderful to look at, technically
slick, expertly edited, yet also implausible, derivative and almost
utterly devoid of substance or meaning.  In terms of things like plot,
character and acting, they're a mess.  It's getting to the point where
I expect there to be a movie called "BOOM!" released.  BOOM! will be
just two solid hours of explosions.  No plot.  No characters.  No
actors.  No story.  Just explosions and great visuals.  Well,
fortunately every so often Hollywood does come out with suspenseful
thrilling gems like SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, THE FUGITIVE, and IN THE LINE
OF FIRE ... movies that have wonderful performances, believable and
engaging characters and events, and taut plot lines.  SPEED is in a
whole different ball park.  It will make a *whole* lot of money this
summer.  It is a fun ride if you accept and expect it for the junk food
entertainment that it is.  However, it's not much beyond that.

Title
Review for Cliffhanger (1993)
     CLIFFHANGER is the new "comeback" film for Sylvester Stallone, a
high-altitude adventure taking place mostly on snowy (Rocky?) mountain
peaks (actually shot in the Italian Alps).  Stallone stars in the film
and also did massive re-writes of the script.
     The opening sequence is promising enough--Stallone tries to rescue
Michael Rooker's character's girlfriend dangling precariously from a
rope thousands of feet above a rocky canyon floor.  Well, things do not
turn out well, and the movie jumps eight months ahead to show Stallone
coming back home to the mountains to reconcile himself with his group
of friends who shared in the harrowing experience.
     At the same time, hundreds of millions of dollars in cash are
being readied for air transport by the U.S. Treasury.  The cash is
being transported by plane to avoid the hazards of the cashload being
robbed on route.  But John Lithgow, the obligatory gun-toting
psychopathic bad guy has other ideas.  However something goes terribly
wrong and the three bulky suitcases of thousand-dollar bills fall from
the plane and are lost somewhere in the mountains (a new Samsonite
commercial?).  The hijacking sequence includes some great mid-air
plane-to-plane stunts and the resultant plane crash is the best since
ALIVE.  Stranded in the mountains, Lithgow and crew call for help and
Stallone and Rooker come climbing to the rescue.
     The rest of the movie basically consists of the group's efforts to
recover the lost money while Rooker, Stallone and friends thwart them
at every turn.  There's lots of action, explosions, gun battles,
fistfights, more explosions, avalanches, and people hanging by their
fingertips above yawning chasms.
     The problem is: who cares?  So much time is spent on action,
pyrotechnics and dizzying camera angles and so little time and effort
is spent on even the most perfunctory character development that we
just don't care what happens to these people.  What's the point of
putting someone in a precarious, ostensibly suspenseful situation when
that person is obviously just an actor playing a character as flat as
the cliff face they're hanging from?  The characters in this movie are
just not believable, one-dimensional, sketchily drawn at best, and
unworthy of our concern.
     Stallone is ... well, Stallone.  He may suffer now from the same
fate of Madonna, i.e. he's become a caricature of himself, he is
upstaged by his own 'real life' persona ... the guy has never had much
of a range anyway ... it's hard to see him as someone other than
Stallone.  Every Stallone movie has to have that moment of 'idiot rage'
where his mouth twists itself into that familiar shape, his eyes
scrunch up and he screams something like "Adddriiiiiiiaaaaaaannn!!!!"
or "Nooooooooo!!!"   Every Stallone movie has to have at least two
scenes in which the hero gets the living bejesus beaten out of him
only to come back at the last possible instant and decimate his
attacker.  The feeling it gave me was that the movie had some nice
stunts, camera work and scenery, but otherwise I've seen it all
before.  Like BATMAN RETURNS (with which this movie has a lot in common
in that it's very big on look and style and very short on substance),
the mark of a bad film is when the hero does or says something clever
or heroic in a scene--calculated, obviously, to make the audience cheer
(there's usually a lapse in the dialogue at this point so the audience
doesn't miss any one-liners while they hoot and holler)--but instead,
the audience just sits there and says, "Yeah?  So?"  Or worse, laughs.
And there were sequences in the film that were like that.
     Rooker by far gives the best performance of the lot, though it's
sad to see an actor of his caliber wasted in something like this.
     Lithgow, again, is simply not believable, not that he's a bad
actor (I thought he did a pretty good job as the villains in BLOW OUT
and RICOCHET) it's just the character is again ... cliche.  His fake
English accent is the worst since Keanu Reave's in BRAM STOKER'S
DRACULA.
     Technically, it's not bad ... in fact, there are some stunning
visuals.  However there's a long pull out shot of Stallone on a
cliff-face where you can just see the matte line.  Some of the rear
projection stuff looks to be not quite suited light-wise to the
foreground, and the 'underneath the ice' sequence is obviously done in
a studio.
     It's too bad, some good characters, some good writing, and this
could have been a tremendous film.  I heard on USENET that this picture
cost $140 million to make which, I believe, if true, would make it the
most expensive movie of all time.  There's a scene in the picture where
Stallone and friend cuddle next to a fire of burning thousand-dollar
bills.  For me, that scene captured the essence of this picture.

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     SCTV, the TV spoof comedy show out of Canada that ran for several
years in syndication, once tried to do a parody of Laverne & Shirley
and found that they just couldn't do it.  The show was already a parody
of itself.  This might be the case with Oliver Stone's new film NATURAL
BORN KILLERS, a movie that's sure to be the most controversial, and one
of the most lucrative, of the year.  It is also the most visually
inventive mainstream film to be released since Alan Parker's PINK
FLOYD-THE WALL.  Moreover, I think this movie will really polarize its
audience into those who think it's brilliant and those who think it's
garbage.
     In case you've been under a rock for the past month, NBK has been
hyped like crazy on television for over a month before its release.  It
concerns the adventures of Mickey and Mallory Knox (Woody Harrelson and
Juliette Lewis), two lovestruck free-spirited serial killers who go on
a three week rampage across America killing over 50 people before they
are brought to justice.  As bad as that sounds, Mickey and Mallory are
the only two likable characters in the picture!  They are surrounded
by scumbags ... Tom Sizemore as a sadistic cop hot on their tail, Robert
Downey Jr., an Australian Geraldo Rivera who would sell his soul for
ratings, Tommy Lee Jones as a sleazy prison warden, Rodney Dangerfield
as Mallory's perverted foul-mouthed father, all foils for the pure
love, and love of killing, that the death-dealing duo share.
     -LOVE THAT MALLORY:  Done in the style of a tv sitcom, a picture
of Mallory's horribly abusive home life complete with laughtrack and
arbitrarily bleeped profanities.  What's chilling about this is how much
*like* a sitcom it is ... the laugh cues are right on and we react to them
in the same way as we would a scene on CHEERS ... until we realize
something truly vile and sick is going on underneath the laughs.  This
is arguably the most effective sequence in the picture.
     -Perfectly timed "subliminals" ... someone says something to Mickey
that we know pisses him off and there's a short "cut" of a few frames
of a bleeding head screaming.  A brief peek of the rage within.
     -A cop murder captured live on television ... then a cut to the
Coca-Cola commercial with the smiling computer animated polar bears.
Talk about trivialization!
     Lewis and Harrelson do fine jobs considering the amount of special
effects they have to contend with.  There might be some Oscar
nominations in the offing here unless the Academy gets cold feet from
this controversial picture.
     One weak point of the film is that there really isn't any
exposition about how the public comes to love these two ... perhaps
they've been watching TV versions that give the killers the same
preferential treatment as this movie?
     Just about everyone they kill does something (at least in the mind
of a killer, or a moviegoer) to deserve it.  A cowboy dances vulgarly,
unwelcome with Mallory, a redneck trucker ogles her and talks to Mickey
vulgarly about what he'd like to do to her, a horny gas station
attendant tries to rape her, a waitress snaps rudely at her ... they're
all blown away ... and inside, more and more, we're cheering the killers
on.
     By the end of the movie, during the prison break, we're cheering
for the prisoners and escapees as they smash and kill their captors ...
rather like the gawkers on the overpass in LA cheering OJ Simpson 50
yard dash into the end zone.
     Much has been made about the fact that throughout the movie Stone
uses just about every special cinematic 'gimmick' in the book:  8mm,
lens filters, grainy black and white, jump cuts and flashbacks galore,
animation, morphing, pixelvision, front projection, rear projection,
video, subliminals, laughtracks, reverse-reverb, slow motion, super
slow-mo, claymation(?), time-lapse, double exposure ... to name only
the ones I recognized!  the film is a literal textbook of special film
technique and certainly it is the most prominent, even overwhelming,
aspect of the movie.  The average length of a shot would be interesting
to figure out.  I suspect it's probably under a second, maybe two at
the most.  Perhaps when this comes out on video Criterion Collection
will issue it on laserdisc in CAV format so that videophiles can check
it out literally frame by frame.  There is enough STUFF in this film
for ten films and to be frank it is frequently distracting.  While
watching this movie I found that I was so captivated by the astonishing
visuals I wasn't paying any attention to the characters, dialogue or
the plot.
     All this begs the question:  Why did Oliver Stone make his film
like this?  I have always been impressed by at least the *visuals* of
his movies even if I don't always agree with the ideas behind them.
JFK for example was a factual mess but technically brilliant.  But
Stone's smart enough guy to know that this movie would affect its
viewers in the way I described and I really believe that it's
intentional, as I'm sure a lot of people have figured out.  What he's
doing is caricaturizing American media...  offering forth the favorite
subject of the tabloid news circuit (serial killers) in the same kind
of quasi-real quick-cut flash and sparkle style of those same tabloid
news shows.  Stone seems to be saying "you want sensationalism?  You
want flashy visual gimmicks?  You want the STORY and not the reality?
Here!  Here it is in spades times ten!!"  The problem with this film's
reception with people who criticize it, I think, is they don't GET that
it's a spoof of media.  And understandably so!  Indeed, "news" nowadays
has gotten all too much like the style of NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  It's
hard to tell the caricature from the original and at first glance it
seems that Stone is just offering *more* of what he's purportedly
criticizing and spoofing.  The difference between what Stone offers and
what television offers is that Stone has a bigger budget and more time
to work on it.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS is visually assaultive, confusing,
violence-glorifying, over-the-top, pretentious, self-indulgent comic
book fairy tale.  But that's the point!
     There really is a fine line between what Stone has put together
here and what he's commenting on and spoofing.  Since media is becoming
more and more a parody of itself, parodying media is getting to be a
tricky business calling for the kind of extremities Stone explores
here.

Title
Review for C'est arrivé prčs de chez vous (1992)
     I just rented this movie last night (I think it just came out on
tape) and was kind of skeptical at first as I usually don't like
foreign movies, but I was *very* *very* impressed by this movie.  I
know of no other movie that was so simultaneously shocking, disturbing
and yet consistently hilarious as this one.  Scenes like the
shitting/singing guy and the nurse arguing in the hospital, confronting
the other film crew and shooting them and many others have me ROTFL.
Another interesting dichotomy was that the movie was simultaneously
done very realistically and yet was extremely absurd.  I'd be very
interested in any information people might have as to how the movie was
made, how such natural performances were elicited from people who may
or may not be actors, the special effects, how much was actually
improvised, etc.  Some aspects of the movie reminded me of Woody
Allen's TAKE THE MONEY AND RUN and Reiner's SPINAL TAP... due to the
cinema verite' absurdist pseudo documentary style of the picture.
Other scenes reminded me of HENRY-PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER  such as
the slow motion replaying of an attempted murder and the assault on a
family in a suburban home.  The neck brace reminded me of the final
scene in A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, another movie with a charismatic
psychopath as it's focus.  Many scenes reached the point of stomach
wrenching realism and then some absurd element was added when the
viewer reaches the maximum point of queasiness.  *This movie is great!*
In case anyone doesn't know what I'm talking about the movie is
basically a pseudo-documentary that follows the exploits of a
charismatic French serial killer.  I *highly* recommend this film!

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
     JURASSIC PARK has finally opened and heretofore has been one of
the most eagerly anticipated and much talked and speculated about film
in quite a while.  Today was opening day and I saw the first showing
having purchased my tickets two weeks ago.  Surely, this opening
weekend will put a lot of money in Universal Picture's coffers.  I
arrived at the theater 2-1/2 hours before the 10:45 AM show, and there
were about 25-30 people already in line.  Amazingly, however, I don't
think the first show sold out as there were a lot of empty seats in the
theater when the movie started.  However, when I came out the line
stretched past the theater parking lot and spilled well into the mobile
home park (private property signs notwithstanding) next door to the
theater.
     PREMIERE magazine said it best when predicting JURASSIC PARK as
the number one hit of the summer (it will be) when it said that the
movie provides what people love to go to movies for in the first
place:  it gives them something they've never seen before, and that
Spielberg and company have a good track record (more or less) for
giving them just that.
     Let's face it, people are flocking to see JURASSIC PARK for
basically one thing ... the dinosaurs.  What child hasn't been at least
mildly fascinated with these ancient creatures and dreamed of what they
were like?  This is perfect thematic territory for Spielberg who revels
and excels in making movies that speak to the wide-eyed little kid in
all of us.  A lot of discussion has centered around whether this movie
is acceptable for children.  Well, I pity parents with very young
children because they will most certainly be very very interested in
seeing the movie, but will probably suffer from nightmares afterwards.
The movie is violent but--and I didn't realize this until later--it
is virtually bloodless.  Any dinosaur savaging of any kind is either
done off-screen, is obscured by something in the foreground, or
gore-less.  The only really gory part is a brief shot of a severed arm;
this movie has *far* less blood in it than Spielberg's 1975 effort
JAWS, which was rated PG, one step down from the newer rating which
this movie received.
     It's still frightening, though--because what one *doesn't* see is
often worse, in the imagination, than what one *does*, and also because
of the extreme realism of the special effects.  A kid can have fun with
a Saturday afternoon G-Rated movie like THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINBAD or
any other Ray Harryhausen movie because the violence is rather cheezy
and doesn't look all that real (at least by today's special effects
standards).  JURASSIC PARK is special in that it is a ground-breaking
special effects film like STAR WARS or TERMINATOR 2 was, the kind
that comes along every few years (with increasing regularity, I might
add).  There are a lot of scenes in this movie where you really cannot
tell if there is an actual "beast" right there, live, or if it was
something added in post-production.  Half the people in the theater
were awed into silence by these special effects while the other half
was reverently  applauding them.  Those that stayed for the credits
applauded the names of the SFX technicians.
     The dinosaurs, the special effects, in fact, every technical
aspect of this movie are the real stars of it.  And yet, it doesn't
seem contrived; the movie flows seamlessly in its adventure through
this prehistoric fantasy world; you don't have the sense of some
special effects technician stepping rudely into the storyline and
saying in effect, "Look what I can do!", and yet have little else to
offer.  This, I think, was an unfortunate aspect that ruined other
otherwise good movies like TOTAL RECALL and most recently,
CLIFFHANGER.
     The dinosaurs are, in a word, fantastic, and had me practically
levitating out of my seat at one moment and staring wide-eyed with my
mouth open the next.  But more on them in a moment.
     The much talked about sound system is indeed, as I heard one
person aptly describe it, a feast for the ears.  As I understand it is
contained in compressed form on a CD-ROM and each of the frames of the
film is encoded with an unseen number which keeps the soundtrack
(music, sound effects, dialogue, etc.) in sync with the picture.    The
ambient sounds of the jungle, the rainfall, the thunderstorm and the
sounds of the dinosaurs themselves, surround you in a way never quite
attained with other systems (apparently George Lucas' THX system was
used to mix the soundtrack or else was used in some other way, as the
logo appears in the closing credits--thanks is also given to George
Lucas).  It is also very well suited to John Williams' soundtrack which
deftly captures both the majesty and suspense of the various scenes.
Especially in the "high-action" sequences, the soundtrack recalls his
work in Spielberg's CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND.  JURASSIC PARK
won't get any Oscars for acting, directing, or best picture, but it
will no doubt sweep the technical awards next year at the Academy
Awards, and will *definitely* get "Best Sound."  (But then again, I
was sure BATMAN RETURNS was going to win "Best Costumes," and it didn't
even get nominated in that category).
     The acting is largely unremarkable and yet as good as any other
Spielberg movie.  I thought the most interesting aspect of this was
Neill's character's dislike of children and Dern's character's
awareness of this, something that is obvious yet remains completely
unspoken throughout the film.
    Now... some words about those dinosaurs...
[Note--the rest of this review gives details on what the dinosaurs
looked like and other plot points.  If you would rather be surprised,
don't read any further]
The Brachiosauri and the Hadrosauri:
     The first really good look at a dinosaur comes a full fifteen to
twenty minutes into the picture (at least it seemed that long) and it
is nothing short of breathtaking.  A titanic Brachiosaurus lumbers a
few feet away from the principal characters, astonishingly graceful for
its huge size as it stands on its hind legs and nibbles on a tall
tree-top.  The characters are just a few feet away from this huge
beast, as I say, something I would be very loath to do in such a
situation as this behemoth could obviously crush a jeep like it was a
styrofoam cup.  The effect is almost perfect.  There are no matte
lines; the "effect" moves perfectly in sync with the changing angle
of the camera which looks up at this towering behemoth.  I was amazed
that you can actually see the action of this creature's muscles and
sinews, under its skin, as it moves across the screen.  If you look
closely, you can see just the slightest jerkiness of animation as it
reaches up for the tree-branches.  The skin looks a little bit too
shimmery ... but all in all, this first glimpse of one of the dinosaurs
blew my socks off.  Perhaps I've been watching videos too long as I
found myself reaching for a remote control to back it up and look at it
again.  A wonderful long shot is seen at the end of this scene of a
couple of Brachiosauri in a lake while duck-billed dinosaurs
(Hadrosauri) drink at the water's edge.  The scene is seen through
the "heat shimmer" one would naturally see while looking across water
on a sunny day, adding yet another splendid dimension of authenticity
to the scene.
     Later in the movie, we see the huge head of a Brachiosaurus as it
discovers Neill's character, and the two kids, in a tall tree.  They
playfully pet it and feed it branches.  Neill's character continually
reassures the little tykes that the Brachiosaurus is a "veggie-saurus"
and therefore harmless to humans.  This was a little unrealistic for
me ... I mean, sure it's a vegetarian, but so are rhinoceri and bull
elephants, and they are hardly "harmless," and I wouldn't want to get
too close to one.  In the case of the Brachiosaurus (which isn't all
that bright, about as smart as a cow--a very, very *big* cow), it
probably wouldn't know your arm wasn't a branch until it spat it,
severed and mangled, from its chomping jaws.  But it seems this scene
was necessary to show at least *some* dinosaurs were friendly.
     Actually only one is shown in the film, and although it seems very
much alive (it breathes, its eyes roll, its "nose" snorts, its legs
twitch) the poor thing is sick as a dog and doesn't really move to
speak of.  This leads to a pretty funny scene involving heaping,
steaming mounds of "dino-dung."
     These are the "gazelles" of the prehistoric world.  This is
another wonderful sight that you only glimpse briefly in the television
trailer.  A stampede of these fast-moving kangaroo-type beasts sweep
across the sun-drenched grassy plains at high speed.  Fantastic
effect.  It occurred to me while watching this that the reason so many
stop-motion effects of yesteryear don't look quite right and have that
"animated" quality to them is that they are actually shot perfectly
still in several different positions and while viewed in sequence they
seem to be moving, but there's one realistic quality of motion in
this type of animation that isn't captured in this method and that
is ... the blur.  "Real" things blur on film when they move quickly and
that is just what has been done here (I assume by computer
enhancement).  The effect is a real jaw-dropper.
     This is a curious and frightening creature (at first it just seems
curious and even harmless), just a little mechanical looking, somewhat
smaller than how I visualized it in the book.  When attacking, (which
consists of spitting brown-green viscous, paralyzing, blinding, "gobs"
onto its prey) a multi-colored fan of skin opens up around its head
like that lizard that runs across the desert on its hind legs, which
the Japanese find hilarious, that you see on "National Geographic" all
the time.
     You'll be looking at some of the T-Rex footage wondering how the
hell they filmed it, and that's the real acid test for a good
effect.  The Rex is devastating, horrifying, awe-inspiring, even
somewhat beautiful.  The ultimate monster--it kind of makes Godzilla
look like Barney and "Jaws" look like a tadpole.  In the scene where
you first see the beast, in its attack on the jeeps, it just about had
me climbing up onto the back of my theater seat.  The sequences with
the T-Rex are technically seamless.  What more can I say?
     Well ... chilling.  The creatures have a cold-as-steel, evil, yet
intelligent look to them.  True predators, and very faithful to how
they are depicted in the book.  I only wish their presence in the
movie, their "character," if you will,  was more fully explored.  There
is one moment during the climax with these creatures (which I won't
give away) that almost made me jump into the aisle behind me.
    The fact that I would have liked to have seen the Raptors more
fully explored, as they were in the book, brings me to an aspect of
JURASSIC PARK that has been much discussed on Internet, and that is
how it compares to the book.
     Basically what you got here is a movie just over two hours long,
as a lot of Spielberg blockbusters are.  The producers, and the studio,
probably didn't want it too much longer than that to ensure maximum
showings in the theater for any given day were possible.  However, when
comparing JURASSIC PARK: THE MOVIE to JURASSIC PARK: THE BOOK, what
you basically got here is a telescoped, condensed, Reader's Digest
version of the book's story.  It occurred to me that to fully cover what
took place in the book (and this is true of almost all book/movie
adaptations) you were probably looking at *at least* a three-hour or
three-and-a-half-hour movie ... maybe even a mini-series.
     Before the movie was made, Michael Chrichton, the author of the
book on which it was based, said that the movie couldn't be faithfully
done for less than $100 million, and he was probably right (I would be
interested to hear what he thought of this movie).  But, there is also
the constraint of time to deal with however, and there is simply not
enough running time in a movie to deal with everything that happened
with the book.  On some levels, the book is better, for example in the
sense of sustained suspense.  I was in a higher and more sustained
state of tension while reading the book than the movie.  The book's
sense of suspense and tension is higher and more drawn out, sustained
longer, while the movie hits you with these fast, hard-hitting,
intense scenes with minimum build-up and are over relatively quickly.
     Here are some of the differences:  (Note, I do not have
the book to refer to at the time of this writing, even
though I have read it, I am doing this from memory)
     Those are really the major differences as I remember them.
     One thing ... if this movie goes the way of BATMAN and its sequel,
it will be on video by Christmas time.  Due to the subject matter of
the film, you really *need* to see it on the biggest screen you can
find and sit close to the screen for maximum effect.
     In summation, JURASSIC PARK is a treat.  Technically it is a real
milestone, a ground-breaking film, and in the age of movies like
CLIFFHANGER, TOTAL RECALL, and BATMAN RETURNS--movies that are really
nice to look at, but otherwise a mess,  where substance takes a
backseat to style--it's nice to find a movie which is not only a feast
for the eyes and ears, but also offers engaging characters, a taut,
suspenseful storyline, and good old-fashioned chills thrills and
spills.  If you think you've seen it all--see this movie for something
you've never seen before and to feel like a kid again.  JURASSIC PARK
is a winner.

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Review of Psycho (remade 1998 version) by Phineas Narco
     I wonder if Hitchcock has enough room in his coffin, he must be
building up some pretty good RPM's right about now. 
    Well, It's probably an impossible task to review the new Psycho
remake, directed by Gus Van Sant (My Own Private Idaho, Drugstore
Cowboy), without comparing it to the original classic so I won't even
try. 
     The original masterpiece, directed of course by Alfred Hitchcock,
the master of suspense, was the tale of a boy and his mother. The
'boy' of course, being Norman Bates, curator of the Bates motel, an
out of the way little establishment that hardly no one visits anymore.
     One night, he's visited by Marion Crane (here played by Anne
Heche reprising the Janet Leigh role) who is on the run from the law.
One shower later and... well the rest is history, isn't it? Cinematic
history. Why mess with it?
    But then, Psycho has been sequelized, cable-TV prequelized, made
into a short-lived TV series, and now it's been remade. Someone in
Hollywood keeps trying to franchize this movie with some pretty bad
results. What's next, are we going to have a video game and Taco Bell
designer glasses? 
     Frankly  I had my doubts when I heard they were remaking Psycho.
It was like someone remaking the Wizard of Oz or Citizen Kane. How can
you improve on perfection? Indeed for the most part Van Sant seems not
so much to reinterpret the original vision but simply copy it over
shot per shot and line for line. There are some original touches, but
they are hardly worth the price of admission. In fact most of them are
downright awful.
     Keep in mind that in 1960 no one had seen anything quite like
Psycho. It left audiences breathless. Movie-goers were not allowed
into the theater after it started. There were stories of people
fainting and having heart attacks. 
     But what kind of impact is the story of a psychotic little mama's
boy like Norman Bates going to have on the desensitized audiences of
1998 when we've seen Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer and countless other
serial-killers-of-the-week not to mention hundreds of slasher movies?
     To devotees of the original film, Psycho (the new movie) proceeds
like a recurring dream. But this time around it's as if you had too
much pizza to eat the night before. 
     For one thing the pacing is all wrong. Hitchcock had this way of
allowing these exquisitely-timed pregnant silences between the lines
that were even more important than the lines themselves. He let you
*savor* the anxiety. That is called... 'suspense'. 
     Here, everything is rushed and clipped, as if everyone's had one
too many latte's at Starbucks before going on the set and can hardly
wait to hurry onto the next scene. Perhaps the makers of the film
thought that today's modern audiences cornfed on too much MTV wouldn't
have the attention span to sit through a dramatic pause or two.
     Even the new Norman seems 'on something'. Perhaps those candies
he munches on obsessively are actually No-Doz tablets. Compared to
Anthony Perkins' studied portrayal of a pent-up, nervously withdrawn
and stammering recluse, the 'new' Norman seems positively manic. 
     Flashing wicked smiles and winks as he flirts and mugs, and
throwing off glib one-liners like "You have a wonderful quality about
you that puts guys at ease", he's so cocksure and bristling with
energy, you wonder what he's doing wasting his life in the middle of
nowhere. He should be in Hollywood somewhere pitching horrible movies
like this one. 
     Another major problem with this story is that it doesn't belong
in 1998. I thought 'well maybe they're remaking it because they want
to modernize the tale' after all the ad copy says 'A modern vision of
the original classic'. But since 95% of the script is taken verbatim
from the original script the 'modern vision' seems to consist of
afterthought touches like Lila Crane saying "Wait, let me grab my
walkman" before her and Sam go to see the sheriff. What?? What does
her walkman have to do with anything??
     The dialogue is fraught with embarassing anachronisms. One
example is the used car saleman saying to Marion, "You have a right to
do anything you have a mind to, being a woman, you will". That sort of
line in 1960 might have been flattering, today it sounds like
chauvanistic condescension. The sweating actor who delivers it
actually looks embarassed at the lines coming out of his mouth.
     I should have asked for my money back at the theater, because I
paid to see a horror movie and I got a comedy. I lost track of how
many times the audience laughed, tittered, giggled and openly jeered
at scenes that should have been steeped in suspense and horror. Van
Sant tries to make it shocking enough for today's sensibilities, but
the results are unintentionally humorous. The only time the movie
works is as camp, and sometimes I truly wondered if it was intended
that way. 
     For example, when Norman pulls back the picture to gaze at Marion
undressing through his peephole, Van Sant actually inserts the
whap-whap-whap sound of him masturbating. The audience howled like it
was a scene out of Porky's. I almost walked out at that point, but I
wanted to see what he did with the shower scene. (Answer: it raises an
eyebrow but is hardly worth waiting for). 
    I kept waiting for Van Sant to GO somewhere with the material.
What he was going to do with the story? It would have been interesting
to see the makers of this film truly rework it from the ground up
instead of just adding a few modern technical touches. 
     For instance, instead of Sam living on a cot in the back of a
hardware store, what if he was sleeping on his buddy's couch and
working at a temp job at Manpower? Doesn't that seem to make more
sense in today's world?
     Or why not have Arbogast (the private detective played by William
Macy) be a woman? It would have been interesting to see Kathy Bates
put Norman Bates on the spot, but I guess that would have required too
many rewrites. 
     The plot is also seeded with logic problems when told in a modern
setting:
     For example, why would Sam and Marion have a tryst in a hotel at
the beginning of the movie? In 1960 it would be because they wouldn't
want to start a scandal. Today they would just have sex at her house.
The neighbors wouldn't even notice. Why rent a room?
     Why is Arbogast wearing such a ridiculous hat? So he can look
more like a private detective? Who wears hats anymore? 
     Why in the world would a millionaire throw around $400,000 in
cash in today's world of ATM check cards and internet banking? To
avoid paying taxes, he declares for all the world to hear and casually
hands it to the secretary. What?? Would this EVER happen? The IRS
would be on him like flies on Mrs. Bates' corpse and no reputable bank
would do business that way. Doesn't this little plot point need SOME
kind of rewrite to make it believable nowadays?
     On the bright side however, there is one nice thing that came out
of the movie and that is Danny Elfman's adapted soundtrack of Bernard
Herrman's score. It sounds wonderful. I was just sorry I had to be
watching this movie while listening to it. Indeed the score has been
imitated so much since the 1960's it seems campy in the context of a
modern movie..
    I see the original Hitchcock classic as sort of like Hamlet. This
movie is like a bad junior high school production of it. It's problem
when retold in the modern age is that, like Hamlet, it's wrought with
many since-told 'cliches'. 
     Let's face it, when it comes to movies about psychotic murderers,
today's audiences have seen it all. (How many times have we seen the
shower scene ripped off?). The irony is, those who have never seen the
original Psycho probably don't know that the slasher movie moves
they've seen so many times can be traced back to just the film they're
watching a bastardized version of. The tragedy is, after seeing this
one first, they've rather spoiled their enjoyment of seeing the
original. 
     Please, please, please, if you have not seen the original Psycho
do NOT, I repeat DO NOT watch this one. Save your seven and a half
bucks and go rent the original for a dollar at Blockbuster's. 
     I had hopes for this movie and still think it might have been at
least an interesting remake if completely reworked and reinterpreted
under the hand of a more disturbed director like John McNaughton or
David Lynch. 
    But as it is, I can't help thinking that it would be better to
just let the story be as it is, preserved in time, as a classic, like
one of Norman's stuffed birds.  
