Authors
Stephen Rowley
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Castle, The (1997/I)
"The Castle" is the debut film for the writing team of Rob Sitch, Tom
Gleisner, Santo Cilauro, and Jane Kennedy, who will be familiar to
Australian audiences for their television work. The four were writers
and performers as part of the Melbourne comedy outfit The
D-Generation, and after that group achieved its ultimate form (in all
senses of the word) on the much-missed "Late Show," they went on to
the current affairs satire "Frontline" (known in some countries
overseas, apparently, as "Behind the Frontline"). That was an
excellent show, if occasionally overly preachy and shy about admitting
its obvious indebtedness to America's "The Larry Sanders Show."
(Ironically, I remember seeing one report here attack "Larry Sanders"
as nothing but a "Frontline" rip-off). By this time, the group had
established themselves as a miniature production company, maintaining
extremely tight creative control. On "Frontline," three of the four
played major roles in addition to their writing; all of them directed
episodes, and Cilauro took charge of the camerawork. Such tight
supervision (and reluctance to surrender any creative processes to
outsiders) is a double-edged sword, as it may be accompanied by an
insular refusal to acknowledge problems. Certainly "Frontline," in its
last season or so, occasionally seemed unable to diagnose and correct
its faults.
It was therefore a pleasure to find the group doing such fine work in
"The Castle". The film tells the story of the Kerrigans, a working
class family in the northwest suburbs of Melbourne (it says something
about Australian society, however, that the family is shown to own
five cars, a boat, and a holiday house, and still be understood to be
working class). They live directly adjacent to Melbourne's Tullamarine
airport, but can't understand why they got their house so cheap; to
them, the modest little home is a castle. When the airport wants to
expand, however, their home is subject to a compulsory acquisition
order. The Kerrigans, led by Daryl Kerrigan (Michael Caton) decide to
fight, eventually taking their case to the High Court in Canberra. As
a TV report puts it late in the film, it's "Daryl versus Goliath."
The comedy in the film comes from the contrast between the naive,
uneducated Kerrigans (if they lived in the country, you'd call them
"down to earth") and the smug, upscale lawyers and judges they come up
against. Sitch and co spend a long time establishing the family, and
this material skates on thin ice with its apparent mockery of the
working class Australian. Yet the tone is maintained well beautifully,
and it becomes clear that the Frontline team genuinely like their
heroes. Sitch has claimed in interviews that much of Daryl Kerrigan's
behaviour is modelled on his own father, and it becomes clear that
"The Castle" is not intended as a joke on other people: we're supposed
to recognise ourselves in the Kerrigans, whatever our background. Much
of what we laugh at in "The Castle" is found in Australians of all
backgrounds: the obsessive scanning of the Trading Post ("Now what
would you want with a pair of jousting sticks?"), the obsessive
multiple car ownership, the sports mania, even the briefly glimpsed
Ugh boots. This self-deprecation (like the disdain for authority
figures) is such an Australian theme that it is likely to puzzle any
overseas audiences (as will culturally specific references such as the
allusions to the Mabo case). Fortunately, "The Castle" has been such a
hit on home soil that it will not need any cross-over success in
overseas markets.
Sitch's direction is appropriately actor oriented: this is not a
technically impressive venture. The hand-held look used to create a
cinema verite look on "Frontline" has wisely been abandoned, replaced
by a bare bones, unobtrusive style. Shot in eleven days, this is the
kind of film where a pan comes across as a major cinematic innovation.
It is, therefore, the cast that really sell the material: all the
actors portraying the Kerrigans are great, with Caton a stand-out.
Tiriel Mora, a "Frontline" veteran, is appropriately harried as the
well-intentioned but inexperienced lawyer (asked what section of the
Constitution his case is based on, he responds "ah... it's just the
vibe.") Many other familiar faces from Australian films and TV turn up
in the supporting cast: Charles (Bud) Tingwell plays the kindly QC who
steps in at the Kerrigan's direst hour; Sophie Lee plays the
Kerrigan's oldest daughter; Eric Bana is her new husband; and Bryan
Dawe plays one of the opposing lawyers. John Flaus, Lynda Gibson, and
Tony Martin (as Bud Tingwell's son!) turn up in cameo appearances. As
far as I could detect, none of Sitch, Gleisner, Kennedy or Cilauro
made so much as a walk-on, though a news reporter's voice heard late
in the piece sounds suspiciously like Kennedy.
Stephen Rowley
sbrowl@Not!arbld.unimelb.edu.au
(To e-mail me, remove the Not! from my address)
Movie reviews & essays at Cinephobia:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/cinephob.htm

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
It is with some surprise that I come to write this review. For, eight
months after it opened, it's a little disorientating to remind myself
that I actually did very much enjoy James Cameron's epic "Titanic."
That's because, somewhere in that time period, the unrelenting
crudfest that has surrounded this film has made me hate the film and
everything about it. I hate Leonardo DiCaprio. I hate James Horner.
And surely I can't be alone in wishing that Celine Dione's heart would
just *stop*?
But I want to be objective. So, having acknowledged my qualms, I'll
try to set them aside. And let's get at the question that the hype has
all too often obscured: is the film any good? If so, why? And if not,
why not?
The key to this question is to situate the film within the correct
genre. James Cameron, let's remember, is an action director; he is
probably America's most talented (Spielberg at his best is better, but
Spielberg's problems of late are a whole different issue). He made
"Aliens" (my vote as the best sci-fi actioner of the eighties), both
"Terminator" films, "The Abyss," and "True Lies." He is not known as
director of romances. True, one thing that was notable in his best
films ("Aliens" and the first "Terminator") was an attention to
character. But this was never a feature that could stand on its own,
and until "Titanic" I don't think Cameron ever harboured illusions
that it could. The beauty of Cameron's work was that he could create
serviceable, yet affecting, emotional subplots and integrate them
fully into the thrust of an action narrative (think how well Ripley's
maternal instincts are played upon in "Aliens"). We must see the plot
of Titanic in these terms. Do we really believe that Cameron conceived
the love story between these two characters and then decided the
perfect backdrop was the sinking of the Titanic? I don't. I'm pretty
sure Cameron started with the thought of how exciting the sinking
scenes would be and then grafted Jack and Rose into the events
afterwards. 
The film bears this out. As a good old fashioned disaster movie,
"Titanic" is superb. The special effects, while not as flawless as
some would have you believe, are extremely impressive. This is even
truer when you consider how many involve water effects, which are
notoriously difficult: they become expensive when done full scale
(think "Waterworld") and tend to look very fake when miniaturised
(think of the breaking dam in "Superman"). Cameron has the advantage
of making his film after the rediscovery of the ship's wreckage. This
has opened up a great deal of new information, which happily points to
a sequence of events considerably more visually exciting than the old
image of the ship sinking intact under the waves. And Cameron is
ingenious at working his characters into the right places to witness
all the best action. The imagery here is stunning, from the creepy
bits as icy water chases rats through the hull to the showstopping
final scenes as the stern sinks underwater. Cameron delivers all the
highpoints like the skilled craftsman he is; the flawless framing,
editing, and choreography of action should be taken up as an example
within the industry (take note Michael Bay). These scenes get about an
hour devoted to them, which is about the time the ship took to sink,
but Cameron isn't after some "High Noon"-style exercise in real time
editing. He's showing off his mastery of the medium, his gorgeous
production design, and his astonishing visual effects. On this level
the film is an enormous achievement, and I came out of the cinema more
excited than I have for quite a while. ("Face/Off" was probably the
last film that gave me such a buzz).
Yet I quickly came to begrudge the film its success. Why? Because
people seem to enjoy the film at a level on which it isn't any good.
It was the love story that seemed to be drawing the repeat business,
and the film's success at the Oscars was based, presumably, on the
belief that the film was (or could be passed off as) a work of
important, substantial, serious drama. After all, you don't give
Oscars to action films (though they sometimes get nominations, as
several of Spielberg's have). And this aspect of the film is a bare
minimum effort: as I have suggested, it is subservient to the action.
As drama in its own right it has considerably less integrity than
Sarah Conner's plight in "The Terminator" or even Ripley's affecting
angst in "Aliens." Essentially we have a familiar, hackneyed class
conflict romance such as we have seen hundreds of times elsewhere,
told with less flair than usual. Cameron doesn't add any surprising
notes to the cliched story, and his representation of class oppression
is very schematic (I'm inclined to think a British or Australian
director might have brought out the logic of class with more subtlety
and appreciation). Many of Cameron's character moments are oafishly
clumsy and obvious (think of the business with the loogy, or the
sequence with the Picassos, or the way Rose immediately spots the
lifeboat shortage).
The performances are nothing to write home about. Kate Winslett is
strong and well cast, but the flat material gives her no character
nuances to try and draw out. Leonardo DiCaprio is all wrong: I've
liked him in several previous roles (I thought he was excellent in Baz
Luhrmann's superb "Romeo and Juliet"), but Jack is not his finest
moment. DiCaprio looks all out of place in this time period, and there
are none of the rough edges to his character that a life of poverty
would likely produce (this is the kind of thing I mean when I say
Cameron doesn't get the true workings of class). He's too
unrelentingly perfect: it's like watching Winslett get seduced by a
cherub. Billy Zane is a lot more entertaining, mainly because he seems
to have realised how preposterous his part is and decided to ham it
up. He has a blatant caddishness that is actually extremely funny: if
Cameron was a little more appreciative of this we could have had an
interesting film that explored Winslett's sly appreciation of his
antisocial behaviour. But Cameron seems to take him seriously, and
indeed seems to accept David Warner's henchman as a real character
too. (Warner actually played the romantic lead in an earlier, less
carefully marketed version of the story). Ultimately the stuntmen and
CGI virtual people come off as more convincing: they at least know how
to die.
So I can't go along with those who gave this film a Best Picture Oscar
(against an unusually strong field, too) or think that it's the modern
"Gone with the Wind." Let's just all get ourselves large screen TVs
with hi-fi stereo sound and watch the final hour over and over again.
Only then will sanity prevail.
_____________________
Review (C) 1998 Stephen Rowley. All rights reserved.
Please do not reproduce in whole or in part without my permission.
I can be contacted at cinephobia@Not!yahoo.com
(Remove the Not! for correct address).
For more reviews and essays, check out Cinephobia:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/cinephob.htm

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
Star Wars: Special Edition (George Lucas), 1997
Review from Cinephobia
When I first heard that George Lucas wanted to rerelease "Star Wars"
with new special effects, I thought it was a great idea. There are a
lot of dodgy shots in Star Wars: Lucas was working with primitive
technology on a very tight budget. This meant that some effects were
visibly fake (one alien
in the Cantina was obviously just a guy in a werewolf mask) or
disappointingly staged (such as the static, uninteresting movement of
the fighters in the final battle).
The changes made in the final battle scene for the "Special Edition"
are along the line I hoped Lucas would take. He has resisted the urge
to mount a major overhaul, and some of the new material is great:
there is a fantastic new shot of the Rebel squadron flying towards the
Death Star. At the same time, the better shots from the original film
have been left unchanged. The wonderful shot of the Millennium Falcon
emerging from the sun is an example of this. There are also some new
effects elsewhere in the film that are excellent, such as the very
dramatic new shot of the Jawa's sandcrawler.
Many of the other changes, however, are seriously misguided. The first
really bad sequence is a brief one: several stormtroopers search the
desert for R2-D2 and C-3PO riding large creatures (apparently known as
"Dewbacks"). This sequence was present in the original, but in shorter
form, with stuffed, immobile versions of the Dewbacks visible in the
distance. Lucas obviously felt the advances in computer graphics made
on Jurassic Park provided a perfect opportunity to bring these
creatures to the fore, making "Star Wars" just that extra bit more
exotic. The problem is, the creatures look terrible. Like some of the
creatures in "Jurassic Park," the skin looks slightly wrong.
More seriously, however, they are terribly animated. On "Jurassic"
Spielberg had a team of experienced animators manipulating the
dinosaurs (led by Phil Tippet, who ironically did some brief
stop-motion work for the original "Star Wars"). Here, though, the
creatures' over-exaggerated movements make it look suspiciously like
Lucas let the computer boffins animate them themselves.
This annoyed me. Yet in itself it does not really count as artistic
vandalism. What does, however, is the awful scene in which Jabba the
Hutt appears. This has been made possible by the existence of footage
of Han Solo meeting Jabba the Hutt that was cut from the original.
Lucas claims that the scene was cut because he ran out of money to
complete a special effects Jabba. He says the swarthy actor in the
original scene was present merely to give Harrison Ford somebody to
play against, and that Jabba would have been a stop-motion creature
inserted in post-production.
I find this extremely hard to believe. The scene is simply not filmed
in a way that would have made this feasible given Lucas' tight budget
and the limitations of 1977 technology. If he had been adding a
creature, wouldn't he have prevented Ford from walking both in front
of and behind the actor? Wouldn't he have had them standing still?
Wouldn't he have chosen a thinner actor who could be more easily
hidden "underneath" the animated Jabba? All these factors combine to
suggest that the shot Lucas claims he intended was virtually
impossible. Jabba would have been a more ambitious special effect than
anything achieved in the two (much higher budgeted) sequels. (A check
of Alan Dean Foster's ghostwritten novelisation, which included the
Jabba scene, seems to bear this out: Foster's description of Jabba is
vague, but to me reads as a human).
If this is true, then Lucas cut the scene not because he couldn't
achieve it, but simply because it didn't work. The evidence bears this
out: the scene is terrible. For some reason, the dialogue repeats much
of what Han had said to Greedo word for word. Jabba is far too
friendly to Han, giving him an extended time period to pay his debt
with almost no argument. Not only does this clash with the tough Jabba
we would see later in "Return of the Jedi," but it also undermines
Solo's motivation for taking Luke and Obi-Wan. Perhaps oddest of all
is that the scene ruins the moment in which we first see the
Millennium Falcon: a little later Luke, Obi-Wan, and the droids are
led into
the loading bay, and we get a chord of music for our first look at the
ship. Yet with the Jabba scene included, we've actually already seen
it. And this is before I even mention the poor effects work. Jabba is
better animated than the dewbacks, but he still looks like an effect
(give me a rubber puppet any day). And because of the twin
difficulties of plausibly moving Jabba and fitting him into the frame,
he's been made smaller, so that he looks nothing like the "Jedi"
Jabba. This rather defeats the purpose of reinserting the scene.
Given all these problems, why did Lucas put it in at all? The answer
is surely that he felt he needed more than a simple spit-and-polish of
his old film to maximise the hype. After all, this is much more than a
simple re-release. Lucas is in pre-production on Episodes I to III of
the Star Wars saga, to be released starting in 1999. A three film
commitment is not to be sneezed at, so the re-release of the old films
is a perfect way of testing the waters while stoking the fires (if I
may mix a metaphor or two). Not to mention the fact that through his
control of all Star Wars merchandise (toys, computer games, books,
lunchboxes... you name it) Lucas stands to make zillions if the
re-release takes off. Thus he needs to make the re-release huge, and
the best way to do that is to offer the fans "a few new surprises."
Extra footage is the perfect hook - even if it comes from the cutting
room floor.
This is change for the sake of change, and it harms the film. It's not
unlike the colorisation of black and white movies: to me the fact that
Lucas is doing it to his own films makes no difference.
___________________________
Review (C) 1998 by Stephen Rowley. All rights reserved.
Please do not reproduce in whole or in part without my permission.
I can be contacted at cinephobia@Not!yahoo.com
(Remove the Not! for the correct address).
For a slightly different version of these ideas (focussing slightly
less specifically on Star Wars), go to:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/specedit.htm
For more reviews and essays, check out Cinephobia:
http://www.werple.net.au/~lerowley/cinephob.htm
