Authors
Russell C. Friedberg
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
     Hello everybody, I've been lurking here for more than a year, but
have never been moved to post until now.  I've seen basically every big
release movie and many small ones over the last few years, but I watch
a movie as a fan not a connoisseur.
     Last night I went to see a showing of THE USUAL SUSPECTS, a movie
I had only heard of from an article in GQ magazine.  Let me just say
one thing: WOW!!!
     This was the finest picture I've seen in a very long time.  I
actually clapped at the end!  The ensemble cast actually worked as an
ensemble, and every single character, even the small part supporting
cast, was intriguing.  The acting was wonderful!  The directing was
wonderful!  The plot was far beyond wonderful!  A million little twists
all of which make perfect sense as you go forward in the movie, and
even better sense looking back after the end.  One of the few movies
which twists the plot for the sake of the plot, not for the sake of the
twist.  I won't tell you what the movie is about, just recommend that
you pay very close attention to everything that happens, and even then
if you figure out where the movie is heading before there are only
fifteen minutes left, I'll be impressed.
     I just wanted to say this, because I'd like to see more movies
which are even almost as good as this one.  I'd highly recommend going
and putting in your money to tell Hollywood they should make more like
this!  Kudos to Bryan Singer (the director), and every member of the
cast!
