Authors
Alex Crouvier
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Apocalypse Now (1979)
It is an action flick. It is a war movie. It is an anti-war fim, a
journey into the heart of darkness, an opera of violence, a study of
masterful editing and cinematography. The Ride of Valkyrie scene alone
covers those grounds in one majestic sweep. This audience sat still in
awe and horror. I always think APOCALYPSE NOW as an elaboration of the
running themes in Francis Ford Coppola's other masterpieces, THE
GODFATHER. The myth of Michael Corleone is about the self-righteous man
whose justification for murder is loyalty to the Family. That is the Big
Cause in Corleone universe, the crusade for power. Is Coppola's morality
play a reflection of our own attitude toward the Vietnam War? To kill or
not to kill. Is the violence a sound justification to preserve
'democracy'? The soldiers in APOCALYPSE NOW certainly not out there to
preserve democracy, they are there to surf.
There is a great scene in the end where Willard kills Kurtz, and the
latter's followers bows down to welcome the newcomer to the throne. Is
Coppola saying that is how heroes are created? Michael Corleone is a
shy, sensitive character in THE GODFATHER before he guns down a rival
and a law enforcer. Not until when he kills, and in effect asserts his
masculine omnipotence, was he truly accepted in the Family and ascends
to fill the empty throne. He is a true American symbol, Coppola was
saying. Now and then, a hero is annointed, but where do heroes come
from? APOCALYPSE NOW answers that question with a brooding cynicism: Our
heroes are annointed with the blood of others.
