Authors
Jonathan D.
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Martians Go Home (1990)
     I don't know how Randy Quaid and Elizabeth Perkins got involved with this
movie.  Their agents must have owed some producers a favor or two.  I did not
see anything resembling advertising for this movie except for an ad in the
movie section of the local newspaper.
     Randy Quaid plays one of those musicians who gets stuck writing music for
TV cop shows and low-budget game shows.  He gets a break and is offered the
chance to write the soundtrack for a science fiction movie.  He leaps at the
chance, and through an accident, his music is broadcast on a radio station that
his girlfriend (or wife?, played by Elizabeth Perkins) works at.  Somehow, the
people of the planet Mars hear it and are summoned to Earth.
     At this point, I'd like to say that the ad for the movie calls the
invasion of the Martians as "One billion comedians come to entertain us, only
the joke is on us."  Well, the joke is on the viewers of the movie who shelled
out money to pay for it.  The "comedians" should have been called "annoying
relatives who come for a visit."  They look like polyester-clad green people.
They show up and disrupt life on Earth much in the same way that gonged people
on the old Gong-Show would.  The "humor" is awful.  Anyway, Randy Quaid
discovers a way to send the Martians away (how I don't know), and attempts to
do so.  The pity is that he didn't think of it sooner.
     One of the few times I actually laughed was when they made a little jab at
French filmmaking.  They cut to the outside of an apartment in Paris, and we
hear a woman and man talking to each other.  The conversation goes something
like:
     Man: "Life is meaningless.  There is only pain, suffering and
     bitterness."  
     (A Martian appears through the miracle of sound effects). 
     Woman: "Look!  There is a Martian standing on our sofa."  
     Man: "So?  Nothing has changed.  There is still only bitterness."  
     Woman: "But, now there is only bitterness and green men."
     This is a movie that I wouldn't recommend to anyone.  When I saw it, there
were only three people in the theater, myself included.  At least the couple
that showed up could enjoy each other's company.  Unfortunately, I make it
policy to stay through any movie that I go to in a theater.  I considered
leaving from this one.
