Authors
Josh Byer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Kids (1995)
     A shocking movie following the young protagonist, and his sidekick
"Casper, Casper, he's the fuckingest friendly ghost;" was easily one of
the most disturbing films I've ever seen.
     It takes place in the lower class neighborhoods of New York,
showing a Canjin' boy like myself quite a culture shock of violence,
sex, and lack of morality.
     Although a moral line is drawn in this movie by the main
character, it is hard to spot.  Granted: he does kick the shit out of a
black man, but his black buddy helps him.  Not Granted: he fucks virgins
regardless of intention, then looks for another fuck toy.
     See this movie.  It will bother you, and the screen gets hard to
look at at times, but it is a superb accomplishment of film-making.
This is the only feature of 1995 I have seen that offers not only
believable characters and setting, but a believable story with a real
ending.  Unfortunately, the ending was a little weak, and a little
drawn out, but a monumentous film filled with unknowns giving
Oscar-caliber performances gave me what I felt other great independent
films lacked.
     The story and writing of CLERKS was good, but most of the actors
were weak.  In KIDS, they're all strong.  Shockingly so.  Not the
pretty people we love to look at on the big screen, but the ugly ones
we try not to look at them.  But they are worth looking at them, if
only to see the lifestyle the represent.
     Final Commentary: Take the WATERWORLD chumps' 200 mil, and give it
to this crew to play with.  You'll get a hundred movies all superior to
Kevin's crowning achievement.
