Authors
J. Crawford
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Sha ren zhe tang zhan (1993)
     This epic action adventure film, set in the 18th century, tells
the bloody story of Tong Po Ka whose forbidden love transforms him from
a simple farmer into the number one killer/swordsman.
     Po Ka's "forbidden love" is portrayed by the very beautiful
Rosamund Kwan Chi-lam.  This fine actress is best known to audiences as
"Aunt Yee" in Tsui Hark's ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA I, II, III.  Her
performance here is top notch.  The film opens with Kwan's character,
Yiu, and Po Ka in a romantic interlude.  They are plotting to run away
to start a new life together.  When they try to leave the next morning,
angry villagers accuse Po Ka of kidnapping and other crimes, despite
Yiu's protests.  He is sent to prison where, because he has been
unrepentant and smashed the courtroom and his jailers, he is subjected
to "the Eye-Closing Penalty" (eyes SEWN shut).  Throughout his
tortures, he visualizes his lost love, Yiu, to gain his inner
strength.
     Po Ka is given a chance to regain his freedom when he must kill
seven other prisoners to survive.  All have had their eyes sewn shut
and one is more crazed than the next.  He survives but his freedom is
costly.  He must serve the evil eunuch Ngai Chung Yin and join his band
of killers.
     Ngai renames Po Ka, calling him Tong Chop, as in "chop in two
halves."  Chop works hard putting the past behind him as he soon
becomes the best swords-man, 2nd only to Sung Chung, the eunuch's #1
killer.  Chop becomes friends with another killer named Wong Kau,
played by Benny Mok Siu-Chung, known to many as "Leung Fu" in Hark's
WONG FEY HONG series.  His character in ASSASSIN is the young killer
who wants to be the best; he lives the killers' life to the fullest,
but Wong knows no master and his selfish pride is his undoing.
     Chop (Po Ka) allows Wong Kau to take credit for one big kill and
then on another killing mission, Wong must finish the killing of a
child when Chop freezes upon seeing Yiu in the crowd.  This sighting of
his long lost love brings all the memories back to Chop and he flees.
Wong Kau sees him as weak and Ngai is betrayed.
     The troubled Chop seeks out Yiu and finds she has married and had
a son named Sam Po.  She lives with her husband in the place Po
Ka (Chop) had wished to take her.  He is ashamed of the evil killers'
life he has led until he is able to use his sword for good.  He saves a
baby horse and its mother and the villagers treat him like a hero.
This reverie is short lived, however.
     Seeking revenge for Ngai, Sung Chung arrives and burns the
village.  Tong Chop emerges from the flames and kills the evil Sung,
realizing he cannot leave the killers' world, that others will be sent
to find him.
     The final sequence of ASSASSIN is a tour-de-force of martial
arts.  The movie is full of classic kung fu battles and intense
swordplay with many beheadings, torso splittings, severed limbs, poison
drinks, beautiful young girls, giant dildoes, perverted eunuchs,
betrayals and gruesome revenges.  The director of this film keeps the
action moving with fluid camera movement and crisp editing.  If you are
a fan of the "swordsman" genre in Hong Kong cinema, then this film is a
must see.

Title
Review for Sap saam taai bo (1973)
     Revenge, burnings, traditional dance numbers, drinking
(drunkenness), lechery, attempted rape, plotting, more revenge,
... dynastic intrigue, pageantry, all the elements of a classic Shaw
Brothers production (filmed in Shawscope!) are included in THE HEROIC
ONES.  This gem of the classic age of kung fu movies is directed by the
great Chang Cheh who clearly is the forerunner of modern day filmmakers
like Tsui Hark and his contemporaries.  If you've seen any of Hark's
films (SWORDSMAN; WONG FEI HONG 1, 2, 3; ZU, WARRIORS OF MAGIC
MOUNTAIN; etc.), you should check out Cheh's HEROIC ONES.
     This epic features David Chiang in the role of the 13th prince,
a powerful young fighter, one of thirteen brothers who all seem to be
skilled martial artists.  Chiang, at the time, was a rising young star
at the Shaw Brothers studio, Western audiences saw him paired with the
late great Peter Cushing a few years later in the Hammer/Shaw Brothers
co-production THE LEGEND OF THE 7 GOLDEN VAMPIRES (a.k.a. 7 BROTHERS
AGAINST DRACULA).
     The 13th prince is the favored son of the king with 13 sons. he
appears to be the youngest, brashest, strongest, and most charming of
the 13 brothers.  His lofty status with the king causes jealousy among a
couple of his brothers which leads to a very gruesome family feud.
throughout this adventure there are a number of excellent fighting
scenes.  The last third of the film is full of great sword-fighting and
super kung fu.
     Director Chang Cheh has made over a hundred films in his long
and illustrious career.  His work for the Shaw Brothers studio represents
the best films produced during the 1960s and early 1970s at that most
renowned motion picture factory. His use of lighting and costumes to
establish character is outstanding here.  His camera seems to be always
moving into the action and the editing draws the viewer in to the story
at hand.
     All the performers do well in their roles.  Ti Lung performs well
as the 11th prince as does Chin Han in his role as the eldest son.  Han
turns in a surprisingly poignant performance. there are many good
scenes in THE HEROIC ONES but one of the very best is an extended scene
in which Ti Lung must rescue his father from an assassination attempt
and together they must fight their way out of the enemy's city.
     This is apparently a complete version of the film and it contains
one of the bloodiest, most visceral murders that I can recall seeing in
any Shaw Brothers film of that era.  It took this viewer completely by
surprise and I loved it.  The screenplay, up to that point, gives no
indication of this scene happening and when it does, it blows you
away.  There are some universal ideas and concepts included in THE
HEROIC ONES that are clearly expressed in this wonderful film without
spoken words.  Clearly, Chang Cheh should have a place of honor in the
history of global cinema.
