Authors
Nick Jarecki
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Vanishing, The (1993)
     What starts out with an intense psychological build-up ends with
a pathetic anti-climax, making you walk away from the movie hating it.
     The hero of our story is Jeff, a troubled guy looking for his
girlfriend.  Capably played by Keifer Sutherland, Jeff spends the movie
looking for his girlfriend Dianne, who vanished from a shopping mart
after having an argument with him.  I love Keifer Sutherland and must
say that he does give a performance that really makes the movie hold
together....  However, the writer did not give him an easy time and Keif
has to do a lot of work to make this happen
     The heroine of our story is Rita played by Nancy Travis.  This
women is an extremely good--yet extremely unknown--actress who
essentially makes the movie.  Her character is selfish and somewhat
bitchy however she saves our friend Jeff from his demise by being buried
alive!!!  (I told you SPOILER!)
     The villain is Barney, shittily played by Jeff Bridges.  You go
through the movie hating Barney (not 'cause your supposed to, just
'cause his character is so weak--not to mention the shitty performance
by JB).  He is psychotic and stupid and has a lust for putting peole in
boxes and suffocating them (i.e., Buried Alive!!!).
     The thing that pisses me off about this movie is the ending....
There is a big buildup with Barney saying, "You have to experience
everything that Dianne experienced from this moment forward...."  Oooh!
I thought it would be some intricate little thang....  Instead it's just
being drugged unconscious and being put in a box to die from suffocation.
Barney says this was the worst thing he could imagine.  I can imagine a
lot worse things than that!
