Authors
eye WEEKLY
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Widows' Peak (1994)
     A widow's peak is what you'd usually call that little dart of hair
pointing down to your eyebrows--Count Floyd had a serious one, for
example--but in the case of John Irvin's new film, WIDOWS' PEAK, is a
place.  A literally named place, too: a hill overlooking a small Irish
town named Kilshannon, upon which are situated a number of houses
solely inhabited by a gaggle of widows.
     Of these assorted widows, one takes precedence.  The formidable
Mrs. Doyle-Counihan (Joan Plowright) is a well-to-do matriarch who
does not suffer fools gladly, not even her rather foolish son Godfrey
(Adrian Dunbar), the only man permitted to live up on Widows' Peak.
Godfrey is a highly eligible bachelor, mostly because he is virtually
the sole candidate.
     Mrs. Doyle-Counihan's chief amusement, in addition to keeping
tabs on the community, is being driven about Widows' Peak and
Kilshannon in her regal Rolls-Royce, piloted by her salty,
cigar-smoking female chauffeur (chauffeuse?).  Mrs. D-C waves airily
at the villagers as if she were the Queen--which, in Widows' Peak, she
is.
     Let's see now.  There's only one other outsider (Godfrey is an
outsider because of his sex) allowed to live in the otherwise
widow-dense village: the quietly mysterious and oddly
vulnerable-seeming, penniless, middle-aged spinster Miss O'Hare (Mia
Farrow).  Everyone seems to keep a motherly eye on Miss O'Hare, for
reasons that are unclear for quite a long time.
     Be patient, now--just a teeny little more plot.  Miss O'Hare
suddenly starts receiving the courtship overtures of Clancy, the town's
dentist (Jim Broadbent).  Into this not very volatile mix comes, all
the way from America, the glamorous war-widow Edwina Broome (Natasha
Richardson).  Slim and sleek in her creamy Chanel suits, capped teeth
as white as tiny refrigerator doors, lips as red as a wicked witch's
apple, hats as wide as open umbrellas, her blonde hair tumbling down
from her hairpins just often enough to make your chest tighten whenever
it happens--she's lovely, is Mrs.  Broome (a new Broome sweeps clean),
and really, she's too much for Widows' Peak.
     She's certainly too much for Miss O'Hare, who appears to despise
her (Mrs. Broome appears to despise her back).  And when Godfrey
predictably falls in love with the beautiful Americanized English
widow, she's almost too much for the redoubtable Mrs. Doyle-Counihan.
     So then this is ENCHANTED APRIL again?  All cloche hats (this is
the '20s), champagne, beautiful motor cars, flirting and shy,
gentlemanly declarations of affection?
     No, WIDOWS' PEAK is a mystery story.  A funny, charming, witty
mystery story, murder and mirth in equal measure.
     Now this is difficult to manage.  So difficult that, as delightful
as much of WIDOWS' PEAK is, there is a lot of warping and distorting of
the action and even of the nature of the personalities involved in
order for the mystery to happen.  The script of WIDOWS' PEAK--which is
that increasing rarity, an original work--is by Irish writer Hugh
Leonard.  Leonard is a clever bloke--he's a novelist and playwright as
well as a screenwriter and prolific writer of fodder for television.
His best known work is probably his play DA, a considerable success on
Broadway in 1978 (where it won Leonard a Tony Award).
     Having established Leonard's cleverness, it must now be said that
WIDOWS' PEAK is just a little bit too clever.  Sure, the plot is
devious enough to keep you happily befuddled until the very end--which
is nice--but when you look back over the journey, it all seems pretty
incredible.  In fact the more you ponder it, the more unsatisfying and
unlikely the whole thing becomes.  In the end, it's the charm you go
for, not the revelation.
     One of the problems lies in the casting.  Natasha Richardson and
Joan Plowright seem fine (Natasha's accent wavers all over the place
but then I guess it's supposed to), but Mia Farrow feels wrong.
Originally, back in the early '80s when Hugh Leonard was trying to get
WIDOWS' PEAK produced, there was talk of Farrow and her mother, Maureen
O'Sullivan, taking the parts of Mrs. Broome and Miss O'Hare
respectively.  And now Mia plays the part originally intended for her
mater.  Quel irony.
     The trouble is--and it's a kind of tribute to Mia Farrow's
enduring ingenue good looks--that she doesn't look old enough or act
old enough to be this impecunious middle-aged spinster.  Wearing a
mothy old cardigan with holes in it is not a sufficient indication of
genteel poverty.  And she's much too perky to seem the age she's
playing.
     Then again, I cannot abide Mia Farrow's acting under scarcely any
circumstances at all.  For me, she's ruined every Woody Allen film
she's been in except for BROADWAY DANNY ROSE and HUSBANDS AND WIVES
(where she was expected to be as flat and two-dimensional as she
otherwise always is).  And here in WIDOWS' PEAK, La Farrow is flat,
tremulous and vague--with that trademark look of utter vacuity in her
eyes that frequently seems to get mistaken for depth of feeling or
something.  Anyhow, WIDOWS' PEAK would fare better without her.
     Director John Irvin, best known probably as an action director for
such films as HAMBURGER HILL (1986), GHOST STORY (1981) and Arnold
Schwarzenegger's RAW DEAL (1985), does well enough with WIDOWS' PEAK,
proving that, despite being saddled with Ms Farrow, he can still muster
a light touch.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)             Archives: ftp.io.org gopher.io.org 

Title
Review for When a Man Loves a Woman (1994)
     WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN is a good-hearted movie about alcoholism
and it really wants, I think, to help, to understand, to offer hope.
What it succeeds in doing, however, is to pretty up the problem to the
point where it's all just matter of mutual adjustment, really.  No big
deal.  This does alcoholism a disservice.  And the audience, too.
     Meg Ryan--who has the cutest gums in cinema--is Alice Green ("Hi,
Alice!") and she's been an alcoholic for a long time.  She has somehow
managed to keep her problem from her extraordinarily loving husband,
Michael (Andy Garcia--who has one of the most penetratingly loving
gazes in cinema), for so long that it's a little hard to believe that
Alice's squirreling away of litres of vodka in every nook and cranny of
their well-appointed home is going unnoticed (she admits she's up to a
quart a day).
     Well, the children (two adorable little girls) notice, actually,
and they end up finally making Mommy's difficulties clear to Daddy.
Mom is behaving oddly, like one day falling through the glass shower
door and lying there naked on the broken glass, looking dead.
     Alice and Michael are way too good to be true.  They smile way too
much.  The film feels liberal and enlightened because it proposes,
quite correctly, that Alice's alcoholism is not her fault.  What she
gets instead of blame is endless empathy from Michael--so much
self-sacrifice, so much spaniel-eyed support that you begin to long for
a scene or two where one of them acts real.  Alcoholism is whitewashed
into some marital glitch, most of the problem being, apparently, that
the doting Michael's paternalistic care for his wife makes her feel
small and inept.
     The script, by writer/executive producer Ronald Bass and
writer/executive producer Al Franken, manages to be witty and smarmy
all at the same time--no small feat, but one you might reasonably
expect from Bass, who pens weepers like RAIN MAN and THE JOY LUCK CLUB,
and from "Saturday Night Live" alumnus Al Franken, who obviously
possesses more than just a hint of his own creation, the new-age cable
TV host whose book I'M GOOD ENOUGH, I'M SMART ENOUGH, AND DOGGONE IT,
PEOPLE LIKE ME: DAILY AFFIRMATIONS WITH STUART SMALLEY is a
bestseller.  The film is adequately directed by Luis Mandoki, whose
Born Yesterday and White Palace have not kicked the envelope of
contemporary cinema.  It's also about 35 minutes too long.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)    Archives: ftp/gopher io.org /pub/eye.WEEKLY

Title
Review for Favor, The (1994)
     THE FAVOR, a sex comedy that's been hovering in distribution limbo
for several years, offers a new solution to the problems of middle-aged
boredom and extramarital sex.
     It goes like this: thirtysomething housewife Harley Jane Kozak
loves husband Bill Pullman, but longs to consummate her relationship
with high-school sweetheart Ken Wahl.  (He never made it to home base.)
She wants to both relive the past, and rewrite it.
     So she persuades her pal, Elizabeth McGovern, who's involved with
Brad Pitt, to seduce Wahl, report back on the experience and settle the
matter by proxy.
     Now the glitch: the deed is done, but Kozak is outraged to learn
from McGovern that the earth moved.  Kozak's sense of deprivation
becomes more, not less, acute.  And so begins a series of sexual
misunderstandings that are traditional and tireless within the genre of
bedroom comedy.
     THE FAVOR has scattered chuckles and is generally amiable.  How
droll you find it may rest on your tolerance for Kozak, who plays a
self-obsessed manipulator who treats other folk like extensions of
herself--not quite a roaring sociopath, but she'll do until one comes
along.
     My limit was tested when, after pushing her chum to be her sexual
stand-in, interfering in the romances of others and driving her genial
husband nuts, she justifies her actions by explaining that she wanted
to feel "like a babe" and "get that rush you had when you were 16."
     Oh, please.  What about parental interference, the insufferable
teachers, the embarrassing, inexperienced sex and the zits that
sprouted like weeds?  Is "16 forever" such a great deal?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)    Archives: ftp/gopher io.org /pub/eye.WEEKLY

Title
Review for Clean Slate (1994)
     Young people may grow up quickly in today's complicated world, but
still they seem to want pop heroes who are in perpetual childhood.
That's been Dana Carvey's great fortune.
     Acquiring a hefty youth following during his seven years on
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, Carvey combines a parodistic accuracy with a smart
kid's let's-pretend delight in showing off.  It was all part of a
lifelong practice of surviving socially.
     "I was half-shy, half-funny," he says of his tyke-to-teen years.
"I discovered I had an ear and could mimic things when I was 7 years
old--and I could get attention.  And that's how it started.  I was
alternately shy or extroverted all through grade school."
     Though his most popular character has been chronic adolescent
Garth of WAYNE'S WORLD, he's branching into grown-up territory--sort
of.  In his new screen venture, CLEAN SLATE, he takes his cue from
gumshoe movies, stands tall and tries out an adult character--albeit
a funster one.
     Directed by Mick Jackson (THE BODYGUARD), this cloak-and-dagger
comedy casts him as a private detective with memory loss who's due to
testify at an important trial.
     Along the way, he gets snared by a femme fatale (mahogany-voiced
Valeria Golino) and locates a missing coin worth millions.  The hook is
that Carvey keeps losing his bearings while the audience stays way
ahead of him.
     "I thought the script was charming and kind of different," he
says.  "It was like some '40s movie, so it's retro, like some kind of
Danny Kaye-Bob Hope movie.  So I thought, 'I'll give this a shot.'"
     The part he plays doesn't call for mimicry, and Carvey wasn't
interested in doing any.  "That wasn't really the gig--I was just
supporting the story.  I liked the idea that the audience would get
ahead of the character."
     This did not keep him from amusing his fellow workers between
takes with constant caricatures, so much so that Golino says, "After a
while you wanted to say, 'Could I talk to Dana now?'"
     Two of his biggest fans have been his most public targets: Ross
Perot and George Bush, who have both called him up to pal around.
     "I was in the White House, real nervous, having cocktails with
George and Barbara Bush," he says, "and I said, 'Ross Perot is a gift
to comedians everywhere,' and Bush said, 'He wasn't a gift to me.' I
wanted to be sucked into the ventilation system at that point."
     Soon to come are films that may release new forms of deviltry.
Promising in particular is Alan Parker's upcoming adaptation of
T. Coraghessan Boyle's bestseller THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE, in which he
plays an all-out maniac opposite Anthony Hopkins.
     "I get to throw bottles of feces--human excrement--at Sir
Tony's face," he says with satisfaction.  "It's a dark, twisted movie."
     He's also in the middle of the Toronto shoot of It Started In
Paradise, a mafia comedy that casts him as an Italian-American hood
opposite Nicholas Cage.  And there's a completed Hans and Franz script
that may one day be filmed, equipped with a musical part for Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
     "Arnold loved the idea of it.  His favorite line is [and with
automatic ease he assumes Schwarzenegger's wiener-schnitzel baritone]
'I could flick you with my little finger and you would fly across the
room and land in your own baby poop.'"
     Not quite adult talk, but Carvey's juvenilia is infectious.  He
may not be forever young (one day he and Michael J.  Fox may battle to
inherit Mickey Rooney's twinkling geezer roles), but for the moment our
hero is the Earl of Adolescence.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)    Archives: ftp/gopher io.org /pub/eye.WEEKLY
