Authors
Richard Montanari
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Heaven & Earth (1993)
     It is a well known fact that, when testosterone seeps into the
brain, a host of aberrant behaviors are possible.  This condition seems
to be most virulent in the middle-aged macho radical who, when faced
with the grown-up notion that he really *isn't* going to change the
world, begin to mutate into a sort of heavily-armed Amway salesman from
Berkeley who won't get off your porch.
     For Oliver Stone, who has always fancied himself the keeper of
conspiracies in America, the Vietnam war has obviously been a very
difficult thing to expiate.  On the other hand, the Vietnam war has
also been very, very good to Oliver Stone.
     In his films, Stone has shown us the war through the eyes of a
naive young infantryman (PLATOON, 1986), an embittered, disabled veteran
(BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1989), and now, with HEAVEN AND EARTH, he
tells us the same story once again, this time through the eyes of a
Vietnamese woman.
     Based on the books WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES and CHILD
OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE by Le Ly Hayslip, HEAVEN AND EARTH chronicles
the war for Le Ly (Hiep Thi Le) a farm girl from a primeval village
near Da Nang.
     The story opens in 1953 with Le Ly's mother, played by Joan Chen,
teaching her daughter the ancient ways of the rice paddy.  But soon,
colonialism arrives in the guise of *the French*.
     Sure, the Vietnamese people had been enslaved and butchered by a
number of masters--including the Chinese--but, as Stone is quick to
remind us, this, like the Americans to come, is occidental occupation,
which makes it more insidious somehow.
     Under French occupation, we are witness to numerous scenes of Le
Ly's degradation.  She is raped by a local Viet Cong leader and
subjected to electroshock therapy at the hands of the South Vietnamese
army.
     Le Ly and her mother then head to Saigon, where they find employ
as maids to a local businessman and his socialite wife.  But the
businessman seduces and impregnates Le Ly, and she is banished.
     A few years later Le Ly meets army lifer Steve Butler (Tommy Lee
Jones).  Although it is clear to us early on that the war has unhinged
Butler, Le Ly takes pity on him, a feeling that eventually turns to
love.  After the war, they try to lead a normal life in San Diego but,
as Le Ly discovers, the jungle still rages within them both, and the
war, at least in their hearts and minds, is far from over.
     Oliver Stone's mandatory, fourth-quarter "duality of nature"
speech is, of course, intact here, this time covering heaven and
earth, good and evil, night and day, hot and cold, young and old, man
and wife, Vietnam and America--it's almost longer than Costner's
interminable wail at the end of JFK.
     But is not only subject matter that has stagnated Stone's work.
His metaphorical resources have run so dry that, for instance, every
time life confronts Le Ly in HEAVEN AND EARTH, Stone supports the
moment with a quick stare into space and some flashbacks to either
Buddha, Mom and Dad, an ox, a flame thrower or a straw hat blowing
across a rice paddy.  In fact, when Le Ly visits an American grocery
store for the first time, you half-expect her to call upon Lord Buddha
to shed spiritual light on her dilemma:  Frozen or Canned?
Batter-dipped or Lightly Breaded?  Paper or Plastic?
     As the seething Butler, Tommy Lee Jones brings an indefinable rage
to the under-written role, a character-type that was far better served
in ROLLING THUNDER (1977).  Joan Chen is superb as Le Ly's aging
mother, as is Hiep Thi Le as the fragile, resourceful Le Ly.
     But for those of us who remember him as the man who wrote MIDNIGHT
EXPRESS and YEAR OF THE DRAGON, Oliver Stone is rapidly becoming that
cigar-smoking, boozy uncle who always has to be carried out of the
party.  You want to like him, he occasionally gets off a good one, but
the act, like the smoke, is getting awfully stale.

Title
Review for Perfect World, A (1993)
     What makes A PERFECT WORLD such a huge disappointment is not just
the fact that it is, without peer, the worst film Clint Eastwood has
ever directed, but also that it held the rare romise of combining the
talents of two Oscar-winning directors: Eastwood and Kevin Costner.
     The story is set in Texas, two weeks before JFK's fateful day at
Dealey Plaza.  This is mentioned early in the film, then never brought
up again.  A simple "1963" at the bottom of the screen would have
sufficed, but that might have excised some of screenwriter John Lee
Hancock's precious dialogue.  And there's a *lot* of dialogue here,
bubba.
     An escaped convict, Butch Haynes (Costner), takes an
eight-year-old Jehovah's Witness boy hostage and hits the road for a
little psycho-daddy and son bonding.  We never get to know for sure
just what Butch did to put him in the joint, but we do learn that he
killed a man when he was eight, and that his mother was a hooker, so we
know he didn't grow up next door to the Cleavers.  The Meat Cleavers,
maybe.
     In lukewarm pursuit is Texas Ranger Red Garnett (Eastwood), a
Geritol-swiggin' veteran cop who doesn't take guff from anyone,
exceptin' feisty criminologist Sally Gerber (Laura Dern), who pops up
every so often for a little feminist relief and obligatory
psychobabble.  There's also a black-suited and sunglassed Fed around
for stone-faced quips.
     Oh, yeah, Red and his team phone the entire manhunt in from an
Airstream trailer which has crashed into a tree in the woods.
     When Butch finds out that Phillip (T. J. Lowther) has never been
trick or treating he decides to give the kid a taste of normal
childhood.  They stop at a general store for a costume, and things move
along just fine until, all of a sudden, The Guy at the Back of the
Store hears The Broadcast about The Escaped Convict and starts giving
them The Eye.  The duo make a run for it, and soon we discover that the
kid has stolen a Casper the Friendly Ghost costume.  Twenty minutes on
the road and the kid goes from Jehovah to John Dillinger.
     Over the next day or so Butch and Buzz (Phillip's new nom de rue)
take in a little gunpoint trick-or-treating, a little more larceny and,
after eating dinner and spending the night with a poor farmer's family,
a little pistol-whipping and duct-taping of the man, his wife and their
grandson.
     Eventually, Butch takes the mandatory gut shot as the Rangers
close in -- beginning one of the longest death scenes in cinematic
history -- and heads off to a better place.  Which, for the audience,
after more than two hours, means the lobby, the parking lot and then
home.
     What possessed Eastwood to believe that Kevin Costner could pull
off the wacko-with-a-heart-of-gold is beyond me, as is Costner's
tradition of astonishingly bad haircuts. (Although, this is the first
film where we know for a fact it was cut in prison.)
     Yet, ultimately, the blame must lie with Clint Eastwood, who
follows the brilliance of Unforgiven, and his chunky performance in In
the Line of Fire with such a lethargic, ill-conceived effort.  Had he
won the best director Oscar for Bird, like he should have, and followed
it with Unforgiven, this wouldn't seem so bad.  But alas, in spite of
its promise, The Man with No Name has made a Film with No Soul.

Title
Review for Snapper, The (1993) (TV)
     Sharon Curley is havin' a snapper, wot?  A whippersnapper, that
is.  A baby.  Except the twenty-year-old Sharon's not married, see, and
still lives at home with her rather large, rather eccentric Dublin
family--her youngest sister wears shaving cream around the house,
her dad greets neighborhood dogs at the door, by name, and shows them
to the parlor. In defiance of all the cajoling and threats, Sharon is
simply not about to identify the father of the child.
     But Desi Curley, Sharon's father, can't let it go. He is
determined to get to the bottom of it. No matter how many pints of
Guinness Stout he has to imbibe in the process.
     And so goes life in THE SNAPPER, the second installment in the
Barrytown trilogy by Irish novelist Roddy Doyle. The first act, THE
COMMITMENTS, itself made into a smashing 1991 film by Alan Parker,
introduced us to a group of working-class Dublin kids hell bent on
forming a soul band.
     This time we meet the Curleys, an endearing cast of Dublin
characters headed by Desi (Colm Meaney), a man best trusted when the
statement in question is sworn to be true, "... on the Boible."
     The main suspect in putting Sharon "up the pole" is George Burgess
(Pat Laffan), a neighborhood stalwart and mini-pillar in the
community.  This causes some distress to Desi because George Burgess is
about ten years older than he is. Desi confronts the alleged lecher in
the pub one night, but the man denies it.
     So, why then is old Georgie following Sharon around Barrytown,
moon-faced and forlorn?  In spite of the repeated efforts of Sharon's
girlfriends--a tough-talking cat-pack reminiscent of the sexy backup
singers The Commitments--Sharon remains steadfast. She say she
wouldn't give it up, even if she'd " ... shagged the Elephant Man."
     As the blessed day draws near, the Barrytown intrigue rises, with
the possibility of a Spanish sailor being introduced as the potential
father, claims and counter-claims, attempted bribes, pub brawls and,
certainly not least, Desi's remarkable transformation into a sensitive,
working-class feminist, courtesy of a birthing book called Everywoman.
The change is so complete that even Mrs. Curley (Ruth McCabe) reaps a
few benefits, in the kip, if you know what I mean.
     By the time little Georgina is born (7 pounds, 12 ounces, "big for
a baby, small for a turkey,") the Curley clan is once again intact and,
for better or worse, the first thing the little snapper will see when
she gets around to opening her eyes.
     Director Stephen Frears (DANGEROUS LIAISONS, THE GRIFTERS, HERO)
returns to the working class milieu of MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE with a
remarkable comic touch, a sensitivity to the comedy of the mundane that
seems, for some unknown reason, exclusive to the Brits.  And while some
of the nuances of this very parochial Irish film may be lost on
American audiences (including this reviewer), and some of the accents
may go undeciphered, these moments are scant.
     Colm Meaney's performance as the beleaguered Desi Curley is a true
delight. The actor first staked out this character as the
Elvis-worshipping Mr.  Rabbitte, the father in The Commitments.  His
wide, earnest face is a perfect background for the train wreck of
emotions any father would feel at the notion, the very idea, of
grandfatherhood at such a young and, he might add, virile age.
     Yet THE SNAPPER is as much about modern-day Dubliners and the joys
and sorrows of a large family, as it is about the bond between a father
and his daughter--a relationship rarely explored on screen.
     THE SNAPPER is easily this holiday season's charmer.  I swear.  On
the Boible.

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
     To say that Schindler's List is the most powerful dramatic film
ever made about the Holocaust is not to say that it will, or should,
supplant Jan Kadar's 1964 Oscar-winning masterpiece THE SHOP ON MAIN
STREET, or documentaries such as SHOAH and THE SORROW AND THE PITY as
the ultimate indictment against Nazism and its crimes against European
Jewry.
     But rather it may serve to overlook the true significance of the
film: that being the huge step toward greatness it represents for
director Steven Spielberg.
     The three-hour film, based on the true story recounted in Thomas
Keneally's 1982 book of the same name, chronicles the war for Oskar
Schindler (Liam Neeson); hustler of powerful men, seducer of beautiful
women, an industrialist who needed only one thing to fully flesh out
his marginal business acumen: a nice long war.
     The story begins as seductively as the horror, with Schindler
hustling an entire cafe full of Nazi officers and their women,
eventually securing the connections he needs to open a factory in
occupied Poland.  At the beginning of the war Oskar Schindler was a
glad-handing Nazi war profiteer; charming and reasonable, a string
quartet outside a death camp.
     Soon, Schindler moves to Krakow with the intent of launching his
enamelware factory with Jewish money, hiring Jewish workers at slave
wages and retiring at the end of the war a millionaire.  But Schindler,
whose concepts of war and business had always been conveniently
similar, did not plan on standing witness to genocide.  Like Kadar's
Tono Britko, Oskar Schindler was a man in moral turmoil.
     The film was shot in Poland and other authentic locations in black
and white, except for a solitary sequence where a little Jewish girl
runs through the streets of the Krakow ghetto in a red coat.  At times,
during SCHINDLER'S LIST, it is easy to forget that you are not watching
a documentary; the realities are that heightened, the barbarity, that
graphic and wrenching.
     Liam Neeson gives an extraordinary, measured performance as the
enigmatic Schindler; as does Ben Kingsley as Itzhak Stern, the Jewish
accountant who becomes Schindler's business and, ultimately, his
conscience.
     Yet, in this telling, the very heart of Nazism--the notion that
real might is not just the power to kill, but the power to kill
arbitrarily--is embodied in one man, Amon Goeth, the monster of
Plaszow.  As Goeth, British actor Ralph Fiennes moves with frightening
ease from beleaguered administrator to wild animal.  The scenes of
Goeth casually shooting slow-moving Jews from his balcony, then turning
back to his lover are some of the most stunning glimpses of evil ever
put on film.  Fiennes will surely be nominated for Best Supporting
Actor for this performance.
     But there are so many other numbing moments on which Spielberg, in
conveying the enormity of the horror, thankfully does not linger; the
image of  Jewish women using their own blood to put color in their
cheeks and lips, hoping to convey a healthy appearance; the image of
the five-year-old-boy hiding in a latrine, waist-deep in feces; the
sound of Itzhak Perlman's anguished violin, a muted plea on an empty
street.
     By the end of the war, Schindler's list--the roster of more than
a thousand Jewish names that Schindler and Stern compiled as "essential
munitions workers," hence saving them from all but certain
annihilation--serves as a small flame of humanity amid such monstrous
inhumanity.  In the realm of the soul, Schindler's list was the
ultimate wartime requisition.
     While Spielberg's first two attempts at "mature themes," THE COLOR
PURPLE and EMPIRE OF THE SUN, fell short of expectations, this
astoundingly explicit and moving film should proclaim that America's
most successful director has become one of America's great directors
and, in one impassioned gesture, has crossed a line of innocence from
which he will never fully return.
     You will not soon forget the little girl in the red coat, nor the
naked, brutal majesty of Steven Spielberg's SCHINDLER'S LIST.
