Authors
Regina M. DuBord
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Utomlyonnye solntsem (1994)
     No, no, no, no, no, I am afraid that Steve Rhodes did *not* get it
*at all*.  While this movie may have its moments of comic relief, it is
ultimately a tragic protrayal of one family's post-Russian revolution
experiences.  In no way does it even attempt to resemble a Monty Python
picture.
     The problem I had with this film, however, is that it is just too
depressing (and unfortunately, it is a true story).  Basically,
Marussa's true love, Dmitri, was forced to go to war, during which time
Marussa attempted to kill herself due to her misery without him.  A few
years later, however, along came Kotov, an important military
commander, who convinced her to marry him.  After the war, Kotov pulls
rank and arranges to have Dmitri sent away so that he will never come
back to claim Marussa.  The plot *does* make sense if you actually
watch the movie.  In the meantime, Dmitri becomes an intelligence agent
for his country.  When he discovers that Kotov was involved in selling
information to the Germans, he returns to Kotov's and Marussa's
household to exercise revenge.
     It is apparent that Dmitri and Marussa still love each other, but
Dmitri still carries out his plan and has Kotov executed.  When he
sees, however, the havoc that this situation creates for Marussa and
her daughter, he ultimately commits suicide himself, apparently in
complete confusion over whether he did the right thing.
     This movie is difficult to rate, in that who is the "good guy" and
who is the "bad guy" is hard to decide.  Many of the scenes revolve
around Kotov's wonderful relationship with his little daughter and
Marussa's general flakiness, making it difficult to assign singular
blame for the story's tragic conclusion.  However, depending on the
sensitivities of the viewer, these elements may be what makes the film
interesting.
