Authors
Gregory D. Peterson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sleepwalkers (1992)
     Well, a group of us just returned from a sneak preview of Stephen
King's newest, and I have to say that it was quite memorable.  For those
that keep track, the movie has Brian Krause, Madchen Amick, and Alice
Krige "starring" in it.  After seeing the movie, I am impressed by how
brave they were to let their names be associated with this movie.  
     A quick summary of the movie: a shape-changing mother and son team
have moved to a little town in Indiana for some lunch.  Of course, the 
sweet, innocent virgin (tm) is to be the main course.  The plot is
peppered with lots of chases, deaths, and helpless screaming by our
heroine, the virgin.  Pretty much your average horror fare, except for
the ridiculous plot.  We laughed at the first scene, and quite a bit
more as it progressed.  Indeed, the whole audience was roaring as we
approached the climax.
     I have to point out that I got to see it for free, and it was worth
every penny.  Given Stephen King's recent track record, I was not
expecting much, but I am glad I saw it.  Everyone had a great time, but
we might have cried if we had paid full price.  We all decided that it
deserved two thumbs up, so I heartily recommend it - but only at matinee
prices.  If you can wait for cable or rentals (shouldn't take long),
then all the better.  This movie is a great parody - I'm just not sure
that it was intended to be.
     SLEEPWALKERS had a multitude of silly scenes.  We knew we were in
for a great time when the opening credits featured dozens of mangled
feline carcasses decorating a house.  As they entered the house, one of
the cops noticed that someone sure didn't like cats.  Funny enough, but
that seemed to be the central plot of the movie.  
     I can't really say which scenes were the best.  There were some
classics, like the incest/animal sex scene.  And I have to credit King
with the most creative death in a long time: death by corn-holing.  If
you don't like cats, you'll enjoy watching a number of them meet their
maker.  King had a cameo as the keeper of a graveyard whose aimless
wandering evoked images of the director (Mick Garris) wandering about,
attempting to salvage some semblance of a horror movie from this
faulted work.  People say that Stephen King writes a new book every
week.  Based on  SLEEPWALKERS, I think he's decided to cut back his
efforts.
