Authors
Stairwell Studios
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
GO LONG, TOM:  CROWE AND CRUISE COMBINE FOR PERFECT PLAY
        Ok, here's the deal. To me, Tom Cruise has always been like a
big chunk of apple pie after a steak dinner. Sometimes, it's just what
you want, sometimes it's just too much to swallow, and sometimes it's
perfect when it's covered in cheese.
        He's just what we wanted in Risky Business and The Firm. He
choked us senseless with crap in Legend and Days of Thunder. And, yes,
he showed us a glimpse or two of star quality in Mission Impossible,
confusing the bejesus out of us, but making such a show of catching
sweat droplets, who really cared? Indeed, it was smothered with the
finest of big-screen cheeses, but Tom's a star just the same.
        But, on the eighth day, the Hollywood gods created the biggest
miracle ever. They gave us Tom Cruise, the actor. Not the smilin'
bartender from Cocktail, not the clenching overachiever from A Few Good
Men, not the brazen award-ham from Rain Man, and, thank heaven, not the
curly-permed bloodsucker from Interview with the Vampire. Tom Cruise,
the actor, who amazes in Jerry Maguire.
        And, good giggly-wiggly, who knew this guy could act like
THIS?!? Simply put, Tom is brilliant as the only sports agent with a
troubled conscience, tired of allowing greed to rule his life. His role
is a meaty, conflicted, multidimensional one, a character study of a
guy at the top, his fall to the bottom, and his rise to fulfillment.
        A lot of the credit for this performance has to go to Cameron
Crowe, the writer/director of Jerry Maguire. Crowe's ability to write
with words that speak to an audience rather than at an audience has
always been his strong suit. He directs the same way.  He crafts the
moments, but does it so quietly that you don't notice it until much
later.  Remember that haunting image of John Cusack holding a boombox
in the rain from Say Anything? Simple, not cinematic or glamorous, but
silently powerful. The best leaders are those that command with a
whisper. Crowe whispers, and miracles occur.
        Crowe and Cruise make an excellent team, yes, but they are not
what make Jerry Maguire such a fantastic movie. The greatness comes
from the fact that Crowe's script did not need a superstar to carry it.
It needed an actor who was confident in his talent. It needed someone
who would show himself in the best and worst of his character's being.
And, most importantly, it needed an actor who could relax and let his
fellow actors guide his performance as he guides theirs.
        It is this last step that has always restricted The Cruiser. He
is the "star" and everyone else in the movie revolves around him. I
don't begrudge him this. I say it, though, so I can say this: by
allowing himself to leave his orbit in the "solar system" approach, he
has become the actor I'd hope he has always wanted to be. I offer him
this name to think about for future reference - Tom Hanks, who went
from "star" to "actor" in just a few years. If Tom Cruise can keep the
other Tom in mind, his career could last forever. Go back to the "solar
system," and, well, does the name "Burt Reynolds" come to mind?
        Crowe also gave Cruise two valuable gifts to make this movie
with, namely Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Renee Zellweger. If there is any
mental strength in the Academy this year, Cuba Gooding will be
nominated for and win the Best Supporting Actor award next march. His
performance as the fame-hungry philosopher and wide receiver Rod
Tidwell is the role Cuba has needed to make that last step to the level
of "star." He is not on the screen every second, but his presence is.
        Miss Zellweger is another story entirely. She manages her own
impossible mission and steals many scenes from Cruise, just by the
power of her silence.  With this one role, she has touched on the magic
of people like Barbara Stanwyck and Jean Arthur. She can say much by
saying nothing. Her eyes welling with joy is a thing of beauty. Her
lower lip quivering, trying to keep from crying, is a gesture so
touching, it brought tears to this crotchety man's ducts. She is
beautiful, yet common. She is reserved, yet lively. She is sexy, yet
proper. She is a find for the ages.
        Friends and patients, Jerry Maguire may well be the best film
        of the year. No funnelclouds, no golf clubs, no boogermen from
space. Just acting at the top of its form, and a script that should be
bronzed and given to new screenwriters as a playbook for perfection.
NOTE:  This review and more available at "Dr. Daniel's MOVIE
EMERGENCY" http://www.stairwell.com/doc/
