Authors
Jeff Jenkins
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
  Those loveable kids from TV's South Park have hit the big 
screen! In South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut Trey Parker and 
Matt Stone push the envelope for offensiveness and vulgarity far 
beyond that which was previously seen in the television show. 
The result is a hilarious comedy not for those of a weak 
constitution.
  The premise has the gang going to see a Terrance and Phillip 
movie where they learn a plethora of new obscenities. When the 
parents find out they begin a protest against the movie which 
leads to Terrance and Phillip being arrested and a war with 
Canada (Terrance and Phillip's home country). The story plays 
out like an old MGM musical with the songs advancing the plot 
(although Ethel Merman never sang any songs like these!).  And 
what great songs they are! From the hilariously irreverent "What 
Would Brian Boitano Do?" to Satan's rendition of the ballad "Up 
There" to Big Gay Al's extravagant "I'm Super, Thanks For 
Asking" to some others which are too vulgar to mention, these 
songs will be buzzing in my brain for some time to come.
  The animation is typical South Park (sort of a Peanuts on 
construction paper look) with the exception of the afterlife 
scenes involving Kenny. The scenes of hell are computer 
generated and look like something straight out of Dante's 
Inferno. Plus there are a few computer generated effects like 
explosions and such in other parts of the film.
  This may be the most vile, offensive, and vulgar piece of 
animation ever created. It's also the most hilarious movie I've 
seen in a long time. If any part of the movie offends you, don't 
worry, it's meant to offend everyone. If you're a fan of the 
show, don't miss the movie. But be warned, don't bring the kids.
