Authors
Stephen Jones
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
Angels in the movies are nothing new. From Wings of Desire to A Life Less
Ordinary. Similarly, the idea of Earth as a battlefield is older than
Milton, and has been done as well (Prophecy I & II, etc). God's even taken
mortal (comic) form before, as George Burns. However, never before has
George Carlin been a cardinal, Chris Roc the 13th apostle, Selma Hayek an
exotic-dancing muse. Religion on the big screen's always been a little too
orthodox for that. As in sacred. As in be careful, Salman Rushdie. With
Dogma, Kevin Smith is more than just not careful, he's irreverent, glib,
interpreting the (Catholic) Church through, say, Ghostbusters. Meaning Jesus
Christ becomes 'J.C.' Prophets speak with profane tongues. Nuns are
corruptible. Angels carry guns and aren't at all reluctant to use them. In
fact, the one stable role in Dogma is Janeane Garofalo, the slightly bitter
abortion clinic employee. She's the only one not crusading, the only one
without holy import.
However--though roles like this were practically made for her--Jeanine
Garofalo's not the 'doubting hero' that just about every religious movie
needs to 'convert,' (where conversion stands in for character development)
but Linda Fiorentino is, as Bethany, which continues the longstanding
religious thriller tradition (Seventh Sign, Stigmata, etc) of having a
single women save the world. Kind of like an anti-Eve, just one who turns
fire extinguishers on burning, talking bushes. But who in the 20th century
wouldn't, right? This type commentary constitutes a large part of Dogma--the
lingering suspicion that religious iconography hasn't kept up with the
times. As Cardinal Carlin says, it's time for some revamping; as Nietzsche
might say, though, 'vamp' in that context means already dead. Dogma tosses
all of this around and more.
It all starts when two exiled angels--Loki (the Norse trickster?; Matt
Damon) and Bartleby (as in the Scrivener; Ben Affleck)--discover they can go
home again, via a biblical loophole in the garden state itself, New Jersey.
So now they have four days left to kill, literally, on Earth. The thing is,
though, if they do sneak back into heaven, it'll show that God (AWOL for 98%
of Dogma) isn't quite as infallible as s/he claims to be, and we can't have
that. Meaning his/her crack staff has to mobilize against Loki and Bartleby,
whose Swedenborgian hostility towards mortals is getting a tad out of hand
(see: office massacre, etc). Thus starts all the divine warfare,
interspersed with what turns out to be some rational theological
discussions. But then Kevin Smith's strong suit has always been dialogue.
If only he would have stuck to dialogue, too, Dogma would have been a much
stronger movie. As is, it feels effects-laden at times, (e.g., an
unnecessary fecal golem, etc) and all the delays in getting to the battle
scene in New Jersey feel forced, contrived--as if it's all been extended
simply to allow these top-billed stars a few more trailer-worthy scenes.
Surprisingly, too, a few of the jokes fall embarrassingly flat, even one of
Silent Bob's (Kevin Smith). And, unlike his compadre Jay, (Jason Mewes) he's
supposed to only talk when it really matters. They are dramatically written
in this time, though, so perhaps the occasional dead line is part of the
package.
In Dogma's favor, it is loud, fast and funny, it all just goes a little
long, tries to work in a few too many jokes, when less would have been more.
Compared to Clerks and Chasing Amy, Dogma is sub-par Kevin Smith. Or, Kevin
Smith with a real budget, no longer having to innovate. On its own, though,
it's still better than two-thirds of the movies out there, and has enough
in-stuff going on (Quick Stop, Dante, etc) that die-hard Kevin Smith fans
won't go away feeling cheated. In case you're not a Kevin Smith acolyte,
though, there's still the guiltysweet transgression ('hellworthy trespass,'
in Dogma-terms) of seeing 'God' in lowercase, in the credits, of hearing
angels swear, of dressing George Carlin up in robes, any of which make Dogma
just about worth the price of admission.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
The Bone Collector: calcium deficient
It used to be enough just to have a serial killer on-screen, but then all
the movies had a serial killer, meaning that if a movie wanted to
distinguish itself, its serial killer had to be unique. And uniqueness
translates easily into eccentric. Norman Bates wearing-your-mother's-dress
type stuff. Or, later, Buffalo Bill, making his dress from human skin,
preening in front of the mirror, etc. But then that too got old, ubiquitous,
overdone. Meaning that that eccentricity by which a movie distinguishes
itself had to be displaced elsewhere, spread around some; the detective had
to become the eccentric one, now. And there are endless variations on this,
the most popular perhaps being the Eyes of Laura Mars approach, where the
killer has some vaguely telepathic access to the killings, which turn out to
be mundane. Another variation is the one used in The Bone Collector, where
the burden of eccentricity (the movie's 'draw') is again placed on the
detective, but that eccentricity is physical this time: Lincoln Rhymes
(Denzel Washington, Fallen) is quadriplegic, which is to say not what we
expect a homicide detective to be.
Not that the perp in The Bone Collector is run of the mill, either, though.
Hardly. He's (yes, spoiler, 'he') more akin to the game-players of Copycat
or Se7en, which is to say The Bone Collector continues the tradition of
partially inverting the cat-and-mouse dynamic, via making the killer both
the prey and the one doing the toying. Or, conversely, the killer toys with
his victims and is turn toyed with by the detective. Either way, it
satisfies the need we have in drama to dress the familiar up so it's
difficult to recognize. What's particularly nice about The Bone Collector,
though, is what Lincoln Rhyme's quadriplegia brings to the table: shades of
Cyrano de Bergerac. At times it's practically Roxanne, with Officer Donaghy
(Angelina Jolie) in the field, Rhyme's willing puppet, 'seducing' the killer
out for him.
Too, however, The Bone Collector also has what's practically a requirement
for every cop show: the buddy dynamic. All the predictable little
hostilities and age/culture/race/ethnicity differences etc which are
evidently a necessary ingredient for successful crime-fighting. Even here,
though, The Bone Collector alters things just slightly, by making the
reluctant partner not the older one--Rhymes, whose looming euthanasia plans
are very similar to a certain Sergeant Murtough's similarly imminent
retirement plans--but the younger one, Officer Donaghy. The older officer is
actually the eager one here, which we haven't seen before, even when the
dynamic is used in another genre. Think Unforgiven, the eager young (non-)
killer and the aging, reluctant one.
As for the rest of The Bone Collector, it's conventional, with all the
profiling and forensic insight and gore the genre demands. Se7en type stuff,
without all the Fincher coloring and Fincher sounds and Fincher magic. As
far as genre goes, it even has Michael Rooker (Henry, the original serial
killer) hopping in and out of things, offering all the mandatory
interdepartmental resistance any good detective needs as motivation. And
don't forget Ed O'Niell, in the detective role he's been honing for some
time now (Ford Fairlane, Disorganized Crime, Spanish Prisoner), to good
effect.
Up to this point, The Bone Collector's been an excellent movie. But then. As
has to happen, the serial killer turns his attention to his pursuers, the
detectives, a shift in gaze which The Bone Collector as a movie imitates,
similarly taking its eyes from the prize. Which is to say it loses it. It is
conventional in the way it loses it, at least: the same way Laura Mars does,
by having the perp be mundane (-ly motivated). It doesn't help that we could
identify him so early on, either. In spite of all this, though, The Bone
Collector--in the last few frames--still has the chance of pulling the whole
thing off, but then it takes the easy way out, doesn't tie the narrative
together in the way, say, Se7en does, but instead goes for the Hollywood
ending. Which yes, in this case (quadriplegia, euthanasia . . .) is
definitely the socially responsible way out, but still. Do we really want a
serial killer movie to be safe? Not really. If The Bone Collector would have
just followed through, it could have passed itself off as a serious movie.
As is, though, it's just typical fare.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Title
Review for Play It to the Bone (1999)
Play it to the Bone: going the distance
We all love the end of Rocky III, where Rocky and Apollo face each other on
the canvas not as friends, but as fighters. It's both violent and tender
somehow, knowing that they're tight enough to want to pull their punches yet
competitive enough not to even consider it. Sports-obsessed Ron Shelton's
Play it to the Bone is made of similar stuff, though, instead of heavyweight
class, best friends Vince (Woody Harrelson) and Cesar (Antonio Banderas) are
welterweight, and their fight isn't for the belt. In fact, they're not even
contenders of any kind, but are the undercard for a pay-per-view Tyson
event--the 'appetizer,' if you will--and they're not even the
originally-scheduled fighters in the first place, but last-minute
replacements, all of which serves to establish that, in spite of what Vince
and Cesar may think, this fight won't be about money or titles or any of
that.
For a while it seems like they're even tight enough that they won't be able
to get glove-to-face when it comes down to it, or that one might take a
respectful dive, but then that's what the road trip from L.A. to Las Vegas
is for: to get them psyched against each other, do enough verbal sparring
that they're ready to come to blows/hugs at a moment's notice. It's one of
those long long second acts comprised largely of exposition--what brushes
with glory Vince and Cesar are still haunted by, a little character
exploration, delving into what motivates them, etc--and it likely would have
driven us sleepy-eyed from the theatre if A) we weren't in U-Turn-ish
country (or, for Woody, Sunchaser country) in an envy-green 442 with Grace
(Lolita Davidovich), who, as it turns out, is romantically attached to both
guys, and B) Vince and Cesar didn't have such a muttering great dynamic
going on. As the trailer lets on, Woody Harrelson and Antonio Banderas play
wonderfully off each other, get themselves into comic discussion after comic
discussion. Granted, none of that really matters in the end, but all the
same, it's entertaining enough at the moment that you don't really care.
It's enough just to see this homophobic holy roller locked in a car with an
insecure foreigner, enough to watch how one's commercialized visions of
Jesus interact with the other's elaborate prefight rituals.
At the end of the day, though, they do have to fight on pay-per-view, for a
long list of cameos (James Woods, Kevin Costner, Rod Stewart, all the right
announcers, etc), or, really, for another shot at all the glory they've been
unfairly denied, 'unfair' being the key word there, as it establishes both
these over-the-hill fighters as underdogs. Combine that with the fact that
we always like the underdog to win, then, and Play it to the Bone's
introduced a little difficulty, a little of that necessary narrative
tension: how to work it such that both guys can win. The usual route is to
have one win the match, the other win the girl, but in this case the girl,
Grace, refuses to pick sides, chooses instead to root for both guys, to,
yes, root not for the people fighting but for the fight itself. And, as
their fight goes round after bloody round, Vince and Cesar both
hamburger-faced as Deniro ever got in Raging Bull, this rooting not for the
fighters but for the fight spreads through the celebrity audience, and for a
while boxing is 'pure' again, which is what every boxing movie goes for
(every sports movie, really).
This is Vegas, however, and, as we all know, Vegas chews people up and spits
them out in the desert. During Vince and Cesar's fight, at least, none of
this matters, which is a coup for Play it to the Bone. Where it doesn't
quite succeed, however, is when the rapid-fire dialogue stops long enough
for you to realize that the only real 'jeopardy' these two fighters are ever
in is so amorphous (missing out on that well-deserved glory yet again) that
it doesn't really function in the drama; if they do miss out on the glory,
they'll just go back to how they were when the movie opened. And, if their
camaraderie was any indication, they weren't doing all that bad. Add to that
the fact that you don't need to be even mildly psychic to intuit the end,
and the little things start to loom large: how awkward it is trying to work
the title into a conversation; how much the flashbacks seem to be stock
footage from any boxing movie; how patently evil everyone but Vince, Cesar,
and Grace are, that kind of stuff. However, Play it to the Bone just about
has enough starpower to overcome all that, and, for all those who disliked
the bittersweet end of that 'other' buddy/road movie Thelma & Louise, Play
it to the Bone, instead of leaving the characters midair, ends with so
little preparation that the audience is left midair. Not that all the
narrative threads aren't neatly dealt with--they are, and
satisfactorily--it's just that the end, reaffirming as it is, perhaps
doesn't mete out the 'right' amount of justice for an American audience. To
say it another way, everyone seems quite content to have been chewed up and
spit out by Vegas. Granted, all that mastication did bond them together a
little tighter, but still, the optimism feels just a touch forced.
(c) 2000 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Title
Review for Eye of the Beholder (1999)
Eye of the Beholder: the monitor and the monitored
Eye of the Beholder is a movie in which many secrets are kept. Most
importantly, we never get a clear idea why the Eye's (Ewan McGregor) wife
and kid might be estranged, and we never get a good handle on the clinical
aspects of Joanna's sociopathic compulsions. And these are the two main
characters, the ones we're supposed to understand. With most movies, lapses
like this would be enough to bring them down. But most movies aren't like
Eye of the Beholder, which is able to get way with such indiscretion simply
because the fairy-tale structure is so complete and so powerful.
On the one hand, you have this Eye, for whom privacy is a laughing matter
(if he ever laughed, or had reason to laugh). Like all good British agents,
he has enough hi-tech surveillance equipment that he could pawn it and buy
small island somewhere. Like all good private eye-types, too, he's in over
his head with Joanna, has proven once again that private eyes in the movies
are always a bargain: pay them a few hundred dollars, and--when they set up
their stake-out--they'll invariably see much more than they were paid to
see. The Eye does, and--this is telling--he doesn't blink. Instead he does
the old assassin-in-the-movies shuffle, and falls for his 'target,' goes
AWOL from his employer, then spends the rest of the movie protecting her
from harm--the harm he used to stand for. It's a neat little dynamic.
On the other hand--talking fairy-tale structuring--there's Joanna, playing
more or less a talented Ms. Ripley: time and again, she's surprised at the
violence she's been psychologically programmed to carry out. But then too,
she's cold enough to turn off the guilt, which means she's pretty much the
perfect killer, which is to say she's the only 'target' really worth viewing
by this Eye. His talent is wasted one everyone else, as is established early
on. And that's the fairy-tale part, the Insider part: ideal characters
coming together.
The pairing structure goes deeper, too, though. Not only are these two
people destined to meet by dint of their respective abilities/lifestyles,
but they're also both injured enough emotionally that no one else would
do--they're made for each other. All the same, though, it's a long-distance,
telescoped relationship, with the Eye playing guardian angel to Joanna by
appealing again and again to his guardian angel (KD Lang, at British HQ; and
yes, 'guardian' and 'Gordian' is perhaps an intentional homonym, here). No,
you never do understand a lot of things, but at the same time everything
that happens feels so inevitable that your unanswered questions don't matter
so much as whether these two starcrossed lovebirds will ever get on screen
together, in the closing frames, for however long. It's a romance; you get
caught up in it. And yes, Eye of the Beholder is something of an art-film
trying to go mainstream with starpower (per Magnolia, Being John Malkovich),
but still, not everyone will appreciate the End of the World-ish (Wem
Wenders) pacing, the psychological personifications, the long moments with
soft music. Eye of the Beholder is an acquired taste, isn't simply Enemy of
the State gone noir. It's something in it's own right, something much more
powerful, a muted psychological thriller which attempts to pass the
microscope over the human condition, and then linger for a while.
(c) 2000 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
Final Destination: chronicle of a death foretold
Emily Dickinson started one of her poems off 'Because I could not stop for
death / He kindly stopped for me.' James Wong's Final Destination pretty
much just removes the 'kindly' from that idea. It gets going just as the
trailer promises, too: with a fiery plane crash. Meaning we know that this
planeload of students on their senior trip isn't making it to Paris alive.
Meaning this first sequence should, by all counts, be void of all tension,
as we already know the outcome, already know that all these 'portents' Alex
(Devon Sawa) is cueing into aren't just projections of his fear of flying,
but are in fact glimpses into the immediate future. In spite of this
foreknowledge, though--or, perhaps, because of it--Wong's still able to
generate all the nerves the sequence requires and then some (by focusing on
how Alex will get off the plane, not if), which sets the tone for the rest
of the movie, where Alex is the one with foreknowledge. He just doesn't
always know 'how' until almost too late. It's a very effective device.
And of course it's been done before, too, in every slasher movie to roll off
the assembly line. We know Michael/Jason/Freddy/etcetera is going to get
their quota of teens, we just don't always know how. Where Final Destination
distinguishes itself from the crowd, however, is that there's no Michael or
Jason or Freddy. In fact, there's no visually satisfying physical
manifestation of the Grim Reaper at all, which is quite a gamble. It pays
off, though: by keeping Death immaterial, it gains the ability to be
everywhere, charging every moment with the possibility of its presence. In a
way, too, we want Death to be there, to be picking off these people who
should have already died. It answers our need for balance, equilibrium,
justice.
This doesn't mean we want this unlikely crew of survivors to die, either,
though, which is part of the pleasure of Final Destination. Most of the time
it's enough to compel the drama forward via conflict between the characters,
their situation, all that. Final Destination ups the ante a little, by
placing the conflict in us, manipulating us into both sympathizing with the
stalker (Death, who was cheated) and the stalked (who seem to have done
nothing to deserve death, other than being between 12 and 19 in a horror
film). As if this wasn't enough, Final Destination also smuggles the whole
Boethian dilemma into the works: is Alex (God, here, though he denies it)
just 'seeing' all these events before they happen, or are they happening
because he's seeing them? To add to all this, too, there's a wonderful
spooky cameo by Tony Todd (Ben from the Night of the Living Dead remake?).
Here he's a mortician called Bludworth, and--though his role in Final
Destination is more myth-based (he's a 'helper'), and thus not really in
sync with all the slasher conventions--still, his performance is cool enough
that none of that matters. We're too busy listening to the owls calling
everyone's name, the bells tolling for him and him and her, a Faustian death
calling in its marker, all that fun stuff. And yes, 'fun stuff' does include
some lines like "I've got to get my head together" spoken moments after a
decapitation, but, unlike Scream etcetera, Final Destination doesn't live
and breathe by such cuteness. Instead, it just tacks it on here and there,
mutes it down enough to where it's there if you're listening, but doesn't
get in the way if you're not.
Granted, Final Destination is more or less a serious treatment of, say, Bill
& Ted's Bogus Adventure, where they also have to outwit Death (by playing
Battleship, among other things), but it's something in it's own right too,
simply because it rarely takes the easy way out, doesn't go for the cheap
scream each time. In this regard, it feels a lot like Disturbing Behavior,
only it's got a little more substance to it. And, like Lord of the
Illusions, it holds just enough back for--in Nix's words--"one final
illusion." All horror tries to do this, and only few succeed. Final
Destination is in the latter category here. And it gets there by not
breaking the rules it's already established, which is something of a feat in
itself, to say nothing of how elaborately that last death is staged, Mr.
Rube Goldberg. Never has 'how' been so fun to answer.
(c)2000 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com
