Authors
Jeremy Krug
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for My Life (1993)
     Absolutely amazing.  They say you never really know how much
something means to you until someone takes it away.  Similarly, some
people never learn how to live until they lose their life.  It is
amazing the things which we keep bottled inside, afraid to show anyone,
little things that tear our emotions to shreds, just because we can't
let go of them; such as anger, hurt, and fear.  And what do we do, if
we have lived our entire life like this, and suddenly found that our
life is about to end, and we are not really sure of what is important,
and whether all that we have done was right, or wrong.  That's the
general idea that I picked up, I won't go into any plot because you
haven't seen it yet, and I don't want to ruin things.  Most people that
I asked said they felt Nicole's acting was a little rough at first, but
it certainly improved by the end.  That is something you would have to
decide for yourself, other people thought she did a fine job
throughout.  You also asked if you should bring a box of tissues
along.  I personally haven't been able to cry in a very long, but this
movie made me feel as though I would.  The guy next to me cried three
different times, he told me, and most of the rest of the audience
joined him.  Yes, bring the tissues, especially for your lady-friend,
this is one movie that will wet the driest of eyes.  The subject of the
movie is very original, the writing, acting, and screenplay are all
just remarkable, and the cinematography brings it all together in one
nice, big, emotional, teary-eyed package.  See it, and enjoy it.  It's
definitely one of a kind.
