Authors
George Drettakis
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Always (1989)
     Ever since DUEL, Spielberg has shown fascination for the mysterious and
fantastic, for fire and exploding vehicles.  ALWAYS is a wonderful combination
of all of the above.  The plane fire-fighting scenes are gripping, full of
suspense, and just plain wonderfully shot.  You can almost feel the heat and
the smoke, the agony of the pilot fighting through the burning forest.  The
explosions and fire  far surpass anything in DUEL, EMPIRE OF THE SUN or the
latest, INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE.
     Of course, ALWAYS is not just about fire.  Capitalizing on a clever idea
from the original book, Richard Dreyfuss gives a wonderful performance of a
very human, jealous, possessive ghost-soul, with a mission to inspire a young
upcoming fire-fighter pilot.  Holly Hunter gives a strong, powerful
performance, and manages to rise above the pressing need to prove herself as a
star actress that seemed to dominate her BROADCAST NEWS role.  She is much more
relaxed, and shifts easily from strong, angry woman, to passionate, loving and
caring.
     ALWAYS is funny too.  Following the trend of making comedies out of tragic
events (WAR OF THE ROSES), this film manages to use death and parting from your
loved ones into a special kind of tear-jerking comedy.  The classic Spielberg
fairy-tale dimension is ever present, allowing you to feel sad and happy
simultaneously, in a way that only his films do.  John Goodman, one of the more
gifted comic actors of today, fits perfectly into the role of buddy, loving
friend, and amusing guy.
     In my books, Steven Spielberg has yet to come out with a film that is of
lasting value, a monument in the history of cinema.  But from the time of DUEL
it was obvious that he has the ability, and ALWAYS shows that he is beginning
to find the way to balance his film-making to achieve this desired end.  See
this film, you won't regret it.
