Authors
Frank Maloney
Number of Reviews
164

Title
Review for Mr. & Mrs. Bridge (1990)
     MR. & MRS. BRIDGE is adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala from two
novels by Evan S. Connell, MRS. BRIDGE (1959) and MR. BRIDGE (1969); the
film is produced and directed by the team of Merchant-Ivory that earlier
brought us ROOM WITH A VIEW, MAURICE, and others.
     The artistic goal and challenge is to find what is interesting,
dramatic, and human in the smug, comfortable country-club lives (in this
case, Kansas City-Mission Hills, 1930's and early 1940's).
     The movie consists of a series episodes, almost vignettes, not
quite but nearly free-standing.  We move from the rigid, glacial walls
the characters present us to see them as real people with their own
pains and tragedies.  There is much comedy here and some sadness.  If we
watch them and only say, "what's the problem? they have everything they
need" we are being very much like some of the characters themselves.
Part of their tragedy is often an inability to sympathize, to see beyond
their own narrow lives.  In slowly opening up the characters to us, the
movie is entirely successful.
     Much of the success is probably Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's script,
which moves by easy degrees like a new friendship.  The opening
introductions, the growing knowledge of the other person's personality
and quirks and faults, the acceptance, the caring, the concern and
involvement.
     Much of the success has to go to Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward,
who have been making movies together off and on for 35 years more or
less.  Honestly, I have never seen them act better.  It will be the
subject of some discussion over who does the better job.  Woodward's
performance is a little easier to appreciate, her character is more
lovable and emotional; she does wonderful things communicating strength
and fragility, confusion and wisdom.  Newman's character is
inarticulate, superficially unloving, under control, unemotional, and
underneath as seething and emotional as any of us; making that
characterization live is a major achievement for an actor and Newman
delivers.
     Of course, the title characters are not the only ones.  The
supporting performances were uniformly excellent.  I especially liked
the juicy job of the very "advanced" psychiatrist, who lives in a
moderniste house with African sculpture, wears loud waistcoats and a
beard, and seems always to be enjoying enormously a cigar and a private
joke.  He is played by the same actor who played the country vicar in
ROOM WITH A VIEW and who romped so enthusiastically in the nude bathing
scene, Simon Callow.  I can also mention with pleasure the performance
of Blythe Danner, Mrs. Bridge's best and unhappy friend.
     Like all of Merchant-Ivory's period pieces, the look of this movie
is wonderful, rich, convincing, and detailed.
     I wholeheartedly recommend MR. & MRS. BRIDGE to all adults.

Title
Review for Schreckliche MÃ¤dchen, Das (1990)
     THE NASTY GIRL is a German film by Michael Verhoeven and stars Lena
Stolz in the title role.  The story concerns a young woman in a small
town in Bavaria who begins to research the town's history during the
Third Reich.  When she encounters roadblocks and hatred, she digs in and
eventually uncovers the whole, buried past.
     Stolz is a wonder, fresh, impish, wise, knowing, innocent, and
very, very beautiful.  Her performance makes me impatient to see her
again very soon.  She is supported by a large cast of character-type
actors; I particular commend the man who plays her husband and the woman
who plays her grandmother.
     I was interested in the story and the characters, but I was also
intrigued by the mix of styles used to make the film.  It is alternately
and sometimes simultaneously a conventional movie, a TV-style
documentary, and a stage play.  The mix is smooth and seamless, although
at times it appears arbitrary and without any dramatic justification.
Still when you see the title character on camera with a mike narrating
her own dramatic actions or when a court scene is presided over by a
fat, coughing, blue statue of blind justice, I am charmed by the
audacity of the film-making and challenged in ways that I seldom am by a
movie.
     I hope you get to see this movie.  What it has to say is both comic
and important and the way it says it is intriguing and successful.

Title
Review for Mambo Kings, The (1992)
     THE MAMBO KINGS is a film directed by Arne Glimcher.  The
screenplay is by Cynthia Cidre.  It stars Armand Assante, Antonio
Banderas, Cathy Moriarty, Maruschka Detmers, and features several Latin
music greats, including Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, and others.  It is
rated R for simulated sex, nudity, and some violence.
     THE MAMBO KINGS is derived Oscar Hijuelos' novel THE MAMBO KINGS
PLAY SONGS OF LOVE.  By all reports something was lost in the
translation from print to screen.  However, what survives is a pleasant,
likable movie with two wonderful performances, several interesting
character performances, and a lot of first rate Latin music of the early
Fifties.
     It is both unfortunate and a saving coincidence that AMERICAN ME
and MAMBO KINGS opened on the same Friday.  AMERICAN ME, which I
reviewed separately, is the superpessimistic view of the Mexican-
Americans of East Los Angeles.  MAMBO KINGS is a rather fluffy,
optimistic paean to the success of Cubans in the United States.  It is
nostalgic and sentimental.  At its best, it is the love story of two
brothers who have good cause to leave Cuba for New York and who start
their own mambo band there.  As such, it may be an anecdote to the
emotional hangover of the other movie, or its fluffiness may be seem
more than so that it really is.
     The brothers are literally overnight successes, but then the usual
predicaments and impediments slow down their rise to fame and fortune.
On the way we have admirable performances from Armand Assante as Cesar
and Antonio Banderas as his brother Nestor.  Assante is an actor who
seems mostly to have been fated to playing maniac heavies, usually a
drug lord with an attitude.  Here he develops a complex portrait of
Cesar, the ambitious Mambo King who despite his hunger to succeed stands
up for personal freedom.  Assante reminds me to a remarkable degree of
Robert DeNiro, there being a physical resemblance, but ever more
importantly a similarity in the intensity and energy he brings to his
performance.
     Banderas, who has starred in several of Pedro Almodovar's Spanish
films, turns in another excellent performance; this is Banderas' first
English-language role.  His portrait is of a Nestor who is a real artist
in turmoil, whose internal sufferings inform and inspire his art.  He is
sweet, a little passive, and a late-comer to rebellion against his
domineering brother.
     It is no small part of the charm of this slight movie that we get
some fine performances by Tito Puente and the fabulous Celia Cruz, whose
smile could light up all the Havanas of the world.  We also get an
extended cameo, if that's the expression, by Desi Arnaz, Jr., playing
his father.  And as a special treat Arnaz and the Mambo Kings are
seamlessly edited into an episode of I Love Lucy.
     There's a lot of love in this movie, love of brothers, love of the
music, love of Cuban culture.
     It's an enjoyable and worthwhile escape and as such I can recommend
it at matinee prices, but don't, as I did, see it too close to seeing
AMERICAN ME.

Title
Review for Drowning by Numbers (1988)
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is a film by Peter Greenaway.  It stars Joan
Plowright, Juliet Stevenson, and Joely Richardson, with Bernard Hill and
Jason Edwards.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS was just seen at the Seattle International Film
Festival and is currently being released to U.S. theaters, despite the
fact that it predates THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, & HER LOVER, which
was such a succes de scandale last year in this country.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is beautiful movie to watch, filled the touches
that we have learned to expect from Greenaway.  Nearly still lives of
rotting fecundity -- gorgeous, painterly compositions -- charm and alarm
us.  Elaborate, opaque gamesmanship, death, sex, nudity, obsessive
characters in a self-contained and dangerous world leave us amused,
involved, troubled.
     Here we have three women all named Cissie Colpitts who may be the
most charming murderers in the films at least since ARSENIC AND OLD
LACE.  It is almost a pleasure to be done in by them.  The three women
principals are superb actresses and play their Cissies to the hilt.  Are
they the three Fates, the three Graces, are they the same person, as
Madgett (Bernard Hill) the coroner asks them.  They are in harmony with
each other, in synch, and somewhat out of synch with our quotidian
world.
     Hill is wonderful as their tool, their lusting accomplice.  Jason
Edwards plays Madgett's son Smut.  Smut is at the heart of the movie, I
think, he is the gamemaster; his voiceovers give the preposterous and
hilariously black rules for his elaborate games.  Like the angelic
dishwasher in THE COOK, he falls victim to mutilation.  He is obsessed
with death as is the film.  So be warned.
     I might as well tell you now, too, there is frontal nudity of both
sexes here, lots of sex, and lots of dying.  DROWNING BY NUMBERS is not
as extreme in this regard as THE COOK, but I would not say it was for
the squeamish either.
     Look for the numbers 1-100 throughout the film.  It becomes an
hilarious game for the audience.  There is a lot about this film that
reminds me of Monty Python, too.  Insane non-sequiturs, running jokes, a
grave digger, joggers everywhere.  Folks that are better up on their
Python will be much employed here, I think.
     It is my understanding that this was Plowright's film debut.  Since
I'm seeing this film out of all sequence, it's hard to believe.  She has
become a regular presence is last two years or so and a welcome one.
     The cinematography was by Sacha Vierny and the result is a kind of
lushness one seldoms sees outside of old-fashioned three-strip
Technicolor.
     I recommend DROWNING BY NUMBERS most highly.

Title
Review for ChÃ¢teau de ma mÄre, Le (1990)
     MY MOTHER'S CASTLE is a film by Yves Robert, based on the
autobiographical writings of Marcel Pagnol.  In French with English
subtitles.
     I note in the display ad for this film the following: "'TWO THUMBS
UP ENTHUSIASTICALLY' SISKEL & EBERT".  If there was ever a demonstration
of the gross inadequacy of the Nos Morituri approach to movies, it is
this.  Exactly how many thumbs would be adequate to properly rate I
leave to someone else's anatomical imaginings.  For myself, I have
seldom seen a movie which more perfectly also demonstrates the
difference between heart-warming and sentimental, between deepening the
emotional life of the viewer and exploitively manipulating him or her.
To put it another way, MY MOTHER'S CASTLE was everything CINEMA PARADISO
pretended to be and was not.
     Yves Robert is also the creator of the two-part movie set, JEAN DE
FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING, movies that were received with almost
fanaticism a year ago or so in Seattle.  I allowed myself to miss them.
Now I will have to backtrack to a little more au courant with a
wonderful talent.
     Speaking of talent, alas, I do not have the cast list available, 
which is a shame.  Everyone, the schoolteacher/father, the frail 
mother, little Marcel, and their friends, neighbors, relatives,  and
adversaries, were actors, real actors, who convince, seduce, and conquer
the audience.
     Actually, I saw MY MOTHER'S CASTLE out of order.  It is the second
part, as it were, of a super-movie, the first part being MY FATHER'S
GLORY.  Both movies derive from the autobiographical writings of Marcel
Pagnol.  I must confess that being the cultural dustbin that I am I
never heard of Marcel Pagnol.  He appears to be something of a cultural
landmark in France, an early film maker and a member of the French
Academy.  At the very end of MY MOTHER'S CASTLE, we see a snippet of
what one assumes is a Pagnol film, something with a black cat and a
woman talking to a man in his undershirt.  If anyone wants to fill me
in, I'd be appreciative.
     Whoever the real Pagnol is, this film makes me love him.  We see 
him as a boy on the edge of beginning manhood and we hear his adult
voice as the narrator.  This is a film permeated with love, love for the
mother, the father, the hills of Provence, a year of growing up.  But it
is an honest, candid love, that sees the pimples as well as the beauty
spots.  I came away with a small portion of that love and that is the
great wonder of MY MOTHER'S CASTLE.
     Not only are the characters brought life by wonderful actors, but
they are photographed in a most painterly fashion.  The colors are warm
as flesh, suffused with the clear light of Provence, highlighted by
shadows.  The hills that young Marcel loves so are stunningly beautiful.
I have never traveled in that country, but if the reality can match the
film--the white limestone teeth and terraces of those ancient hills, the
open-work trees, the wild herbs, the life en plein air--it must be a
kind of paradise.
     MY FATHER'S GLORY is still playing in Seattle--both films were big
hits at the last Seattle International Film Festival--and I intend to
see it tonight if I can.  However, I'm sure that one can see either
movie independently of the other.  MY MOTHER'S CASTLE begins a small
precis of the other part and otherwise stands nicely on its own.  I want
to see the other part, not to catch up on the action or story, but
because I want to see more of the Pagnol family and more of the hills of
Provence.

Title
Review for White Sands (1992)
     WHITE SANDS is a film directed by Roger Donaldson, from a script by
Daniel Pyne.  It stars Willem Dafoe, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Mickey
Rourke, Samuel L.  Jackson, and Mimi Rogers.  Rated R for profanity,
violence, mature themes.
     WHITE SANDS is part conspiracy-paranoia thriller, part whodunit.
It features two excellent performers in the persons of Willem Dafoe and
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, along with the less satisfying and smirking
Mickey Rourke (who is still my idea of a bargain-basement Bruce Willis),
a slightly unlikely Samuel L. Jackson as a too-street-wise FBI agent,
and the too-truncated presence of Mimi Rogers.  It features the
directorial skills of Roger Donaldson (NO WAY OUT), who confronts a
largely unbelievable story with a keen visual sense and a tight
story-telling skill that keeps us largely guessing.  It also features a
script by Daniel Pryne (PACIFIC HEIGHTS, DOC HOLLYWOOD), a script that
locks onto our willingness to believe in corruption and the pursuit of
power for its sake.  Unfortunately, Pryne cannot do so in a wholly
credible way, and the stretches the audience has to make to keep the
story alive are asking a bit much in the end.
     The film wants to be provocative and timely; it wants to speak to
our mistrust of government; and it wants to entertain us.  It is a game
effort, even if a little short of its goals.  Dafoe and Mastrantonio are
each excellent in their efforts.  He's a sheriff's deputy, but he's a
little too smart as well as a little too unsupervised to be totally
acceptable.  Dafoe has an interesting face and an interesting way about
him.  It's a pleasure to watch him work his way deeper and deeper into
the mystery he first uncovers in the New Mexico desert.  Mastrantonio is
a particular favorite of mine and here she is well used to create an
interesting character, a rich stylish woman with some distinctly
unstylish connections, a woman who is lonely and who faces her
loneliness with humor and a hunger for adventure.
     This is a handsome movie with some fine moments.  I can give it a
limited recommendation, especially for bargain ticket buyers.  Or wait
for the video; it will work pretty well on the small screen; its best
qualities are intimate ones.

Title
Review for Blade Runner (1982)
     BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is a film directed by Ridley Scott
from a script by Hampton Fancher and David Peoples.  It stars Harrison
Ford, Rutger Hauer, Sean Young, with Edward James Olmos, James Turkel,
Darryl Hannah, Brion James, Joanna Cassidy, and M. Emmet Walsh.
Production designer is Lawrence G.  Paull, art director David Snyder,
consultant Sid Mead, and special-effects by Donald Trumbrull.
Cinematography is by Jordan Cronenweth.  Music by Vangelis.  Based on
the novel DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP by Philip K. Dick.  Rated
R, for violence.
     BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT is Ridley Scott's 1992 version of
what the 1982 film would have looked like if it had survived its preview
screenings and a nervous studio.  Gone is the Raymond-Chandler-style
voice-over to explain it all to us.  Gone is the sappy ending.  Added is
a key dream sequence (that presaged, as it turns out, Scott's 1986
fantasy LEGEND), the rest of the Vangelis score, and some additional
footage to several key scenes.  The director's cut makes this great cult
film only greater, more impressive, more stimulating, more interesting.
     It is probably pointless to try to review BLADE RUNNER as one would
a new film, even though there a lot of people who have never seen even
the original theatrical release.  (It was, lest we forget, a huge box
office bomb in 1982, being completely swallowed up by the audience rush
to E.T., which had opened in the same month.)  Mostly, I am here now to
tell you that this is one of the greatest sf films ever made.  And that
if you are near one of the 60-some U.S. cities that opened BLADE RUNNER
this last Friday September 11, you simply must go see it.  Not only is
the film wonderful (for reasons I will touch on in a minute), but it is
an energizing experience merely to be in the same block as a venue like
Seattle's Egyptian Theater and to experience the huge crowds outside, a
line endlessly snaking around the building and down the alley to the
next street, another crowd of people who have just gotten out of the
last showing and who obviously don't want to leave, who want to stand on
the sidewalk and talk about what they have just seen.  And inside to
feel the excited hubbub of the audience waiting, waiting, to hear them
applaud the dimming of the house lights, to hear them applaud loudly the
final credits.  This is what movie-going is supposed to be about:
excitement, stimulation, satisfaction.  I haven't felt quite the same
rush of group anticipation since the original STAR WARS opened.  By
comparison, opening night audiences for BATMAN were bored and
noncommittal.
     As for what makes BLADE RUNNER great, allow me to sketch out of few
beginning points, without pretending to exhaust the subject.  For one
thing, this movie has a great theme, the greatest human theme: life,
death, and their meaning.  What does it mean to live, to die?  Rutger
Hauer's speech in the rain on what he has seen, on the memories that
will die with him, is deeply moving, coming especially as it does from
the ostensible villain of the piece.  And that's another source of BLADE
RUNNER's greatness, its ambiguity, its willingness not to explain.  It
shows and lets the audience put it together, on the fly, as it were;
this quality was not seen in 1982 as a strength by those preview
audiences who were reportedly confused by the story.  It's hard for me
to imagine that being a problem today; certainly, my partner Lyndol, who
literally knew nothing about BLADE RUNNER except that was an sf film I
wanted to go to, followed it perfectly and without the film noir
narration that had Harrison Ford say such inanities as "What the hell
was happening to me?"  Putting it another way, BLADE RUNNER is an sf
film that treats its audience as adults, intelligent adults.
     Another source of greatness is the look of the film.  Seldom will
one be exposed to such a detailed, imaginative, and intriguing design.
The now famous Scott look is still fresh and effective here: the wet
black streets, the steam, the chiaroscuro, the sourceless beams of
light, the random craziness in the background and edges of the main
action.  The eye and mind are condemned to miss so much even while
picking up so many delightful minutiae.  They make the world of 2019
L.A., with its flying billboards, its 700-storey arcologies, its
medieval street life, open markets and open sewers, the grungy soba
bars, the dwarf scavengers, the open bonfires complete and whole and
real.  Everything about the design is rich and satisfying.  For those
who know the film, I have only to point to the chase scene that ends
with crashes through multiple windows to find an example of the visual
imagination that so mightily informs BLADE RUNNER.
     A third area of achievement that sets BLADE RUNNER off from almost
all other sf films is its commitment to examing relationships, to allow
long sequences of characters establishing their characters, establishing
their relationships.  These sequences are not flaccid, they do not
deflate the tension of the prolonged chase that is most of BLADE RUNNER.
They are themselves basic to the theme and story, basic to the adultness
of the film.
     Of course, there are some flaws.  Most especially, I object to
Sebastian's toys.  They are too cute, as well as too obviously Little
People in fancy dress.  Cuteness is out of place in this world.  Even
the nerdy whimsy of a Sebastian, the genetic designer, should not have
been reduced to a reply to the R2D2 kind of sweetness.
     Go to BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT.  Pay what you must, you
will get your money's worth.

Title
Review for Hitlerjunge Salomon (1990)
     EUROPA, EUROPA is a film by Agnieszka Holland.  Rated R due to
nudity and violence.
     EUROPA, EUROPA (released in Europe as SOLOMON HITLERJUGEND) is the
true story of Solomon Perel who traveled not only through the geography
of central and eastern Europe in war but more importantly through the
ideological minefields of its competing systems -- Nazism and its war on
Jews, Communism at war with Hitler.  Solek joins every side, and
successfully hides his Jewishness and his circumcision for years.  He
survives to find finally an identity.  He is the ultimate chameleon, but
he is a charmed one.  He is a very cute boy and his physical
attractiveness make him acceptable to every group.  He is almost too
lucky--one has to be reminded that Holland's script is based on the
autobiography of the real Solomon Perel, a man alive in Israel
today--the level of coincidences, breaks, and miracles is almost too
high to work.
     But it is Holland's script and her sure-handed direction that yield
up a a delightful, horrifying, funny, intensely human movie.  There are
many excellently drawn characters who pass through Solek's bizarre
adventure: the gay German actor who discovers the secret of Solek's
circumcision and who becomes a beloved friend.  There is an hilarious
Nazi functionary who has her way with the new hero of the Fatherland.
There is the sweet and chilling Leni who wants to bear a baby for Hitler
and to slice Jewish throats.  And there are telling moments, little
epiphanies like Solek practicing his Hitler salute which becomes a
little jazz dance step.
     This is a brilliant, biting, funny, disturbing, threatening,
affirming film.  It has been playing in the Seattle area since last June
28 and is still drawing crowds.  Germany declined to make this its
official entry in the Oscar competition for a variety of bogus reason.
Obviously, EUROPA, EUROPA hits the wrong buttons in today's unified
Germany.
     I regret I hadn't gotten around to seeing it before today.  I
recommend you see it as soon as possible.  It is worth full price at the
box office.

Title
Review for Under Siege (1992)
     UNDER SIEGE is a film directed by Andrew Davis, from a screenplay
by J. F. Lawton.  It stars Steven Seagal, Tommy Lee Jones, Gary Busey,
and Erika Eleniak.  Rated R, for violence, profanity, brief female
nudity.
     UNDER SIEGE was filmed on the USS Alabama, anchored in Mobile Bay,
but is supposed to take place on the Missouri, now back in mothballs
across Puget Sound from me in Bremerton.  The film was written by
J. F. Lawton (PRETTY WOMAN), who proves he does know about whoring as he
mixes DIE HARD and Tom Clancy.  Lawton is a totally corrupt hack with a
fresh angle on a dead idea.
     The result is Seagal's best movie to date, at least of the ones I
seen.  (I want to say right now that I go to these things because Lyndol
has the hots for action movies.)  Andrew Davis provides slick, bland
directing as he reteams with Seagal (ABOVE THE LAW).  Seagal is
amazingly wooden, as always, but the story may point us in the direction
these flicks are going to go to find a replacement enemy for Godless
Communism, in this case, the Enemy Within, the traitorous CIA superagent
who goes into business for himself.
     The spook-from-hell is played by Tommy Lee Jones with huge gusto.
Jones is great fun here and probably worth the price of a matinee
admission.  Jones has teamed up with Gary Busey as the traitorous XO,
executive officer, who's quite a case himself.  Seagal, on the other
hand, teams up with the pouty, big-bosomed Erika Eleniak as a Playboy
Playmate who's really "an actress.  I did an episode of 'Hunter' and a
'Wet 'n' Wild' video."  Eleniak is pretty irritating at first, even as
comic relief, but later develops into something only wildly improbable.
     This film is a nothing in terms of any kind of honesty.  You
nitpickers will have a field day.  You tit-watchers will do ok, also.
This is mind candy.  Either you go or don't.  I'm not recommending that
you do, but if you're inclined to like Seagal movies and such, you will
like this one.  Just don't pay full freight.  Or wait for the video.  It
ought to be out by Christmas.

Title
Review for Perfectly Normal (1990)
     PERFECTLY NORMAL is a Canadian film directed by Yves Simoneau,
produced by Michael Burns, and starring Robbie Coltrane, Michael Riley,
Deborah Duchane, and Kenneth Walsh.  It is wonderful, funny, fresh,
exciting, and completely satisfying.
     Alonzo (Robbie Coltrane) is the vast, pushy, sleazy, operatic
con-man cum restaurateur who unbidden, unwanted, and irresistible moves
in with Renzo (Michael Riley).  Renzo is so withdrawn and self-contained
as to be almost catatonic, seemingly incapable of doing anything but
working by day in a brewery, driving his late father's cab by night,
drawing up plans for house he'd probably never build, and playing goalie
on the company hockey team (this is a Canadian movie, after all).
     Alonzo takes charge of Renzo's life and most certainly brings a
weird liveliness to it, as does Deborah Duchane's character, who pretty
much has to seduce Renzo and who has one of the funnier bits in a very
funny movie when she asks Renzo:
     The movie is populated with several wonderful characters, such as
Renzo's "friend" at the brewery, his boss and hockey coach, the coach's
girl friend, Deborah Duchane's girl friend (whose sexual fantasies
provide us with a kind of leitmotiv throughout), inter alios.
     The movie ends with two moments of high magic and a bit in between
that I don't understand.  Anyone who seen PERFECTLY NORMAL please e-mail
me; I have a question I need to ask.
     The director of photography was Alain Dostie and the music was by
Richard Gregoire.  They both deserve high marks indeed.  Some wonderful
stuff in the brewery and elsewhere and the music through was central to
the movie.
     Please do yourself a favor and seek out PERFECTLY NORMAL.  Ask your
art house exhibitor why he/she isn't showing it.  In Seattle, it is
playing at the Metro Cinema without any visible support, no display ads,
no handbills.  It deserves and could win a large following.  I can
imagine the situation being similar elsewhere, if it is shown at all.  I
think word-of-mouth could build this film into at least an art house
success in the U.S.  If anybody wants to post or e-mail how it has done
in Canada and/or whether it has been distributed in Europe, I would be
interested.
     (One final word: the film was financed in part by Telefilm Canada
and The Ontario Film Development Corp., one more sign of the superior
civilization in Canada.)

Title
Review for Come See the Paradise (1990)
     COME SEE THE PARADISE is a film about racism from a writer-director
who has been accused of making films with racist overtones (MIDNIGHT
EXPRESS, MISSISSIPPI BURNING).  It is also about the internment of
Japanese and Japanese-Americans during the Second World War.  And it is
a love story.
     The film was created by Alan Parker and stars Dennis Quaid and
Tamlyn Tomita as the lovers whose interracial marriage was opposed as
much by her father as by the "antimiscegenation" laws of California.
They elope to Seattle to get married, Seattle and Washington state being
known as an unusual place even in the 1930s in such matters.  They
become separated when the so-called internment camps are opened and all
persons of Japanese ancestry removed from the Pacific Coast states and
the U.S. enters the war.
     The pre-Pearl parts of the movie present a wonderful evocation of
Los Angeles' old Little Tokyo, with its mix of old and new country.  The
movie has a lush, detailed look to it.  In one of the Seattle papers
there was story about the reactions of several local ex-internees to
seeing the film.  One person was quoted to the effect that the movie
showed the camp surrounded by three barb-wire fences, just as his camp
was in real life, which detail delighted him for its authenticity.  The
camp is never identified, but I assumed it was meant to be Manzanar in
the Owens Valley of California.
     If it was Manzanar, the site of which I visited twenty years ago,
its appearance in the film points up my only real dissatisfaction with
the COME SEE THE PARADISE (aside from the title, which is an obscure
reference to the movie house where Quaid worked for Tomita's father,
played by Sab Shimono) was that to some extent it soft-pedaled the camps
and the situation.  Someday a really hard-hitting dramatic movie (as
opposed to a documentary such as one done on the camps in the late
Seventies) will be made; in the meantime, this film is better than
nothing, a first step, as it were, in realizing the dramatic potential
of this sad episode in U.S. history.
     Much is glossed over, such as dissent within the camps among the
internees about their own loyalties.  There is, in the interest of
balance, I suppose, a brief, conventional defense is offered by a minor,
white character.  However, there is no doubt that the film views the
camps as an injustice and a cruel punishment of innocent people.  From
my friends who experienced the camps directly and from my own reading, I
know that only the smallest modicum of the pain and confusion and greed
and meanness and little heroisms were depicted in this film.
     The performances by Quaid, Tomita, and the other actors are
uniformly excellent.  I've never liked Quaid better and I want to see
Tomita in lots more movies.  One of the pleasures of the movie is see
many unfamiliar faces, ethnic actors who are usually buried by the
mostly lily-white nature of main-stream film-making.  Indeed, one
especially delightful scene features one of Lily's brothers (Lily being
Tomita's character) who is trying to be a film actor but can only get 
parts as Chinese houseboys.  (Peter Lorre as Mr. Moto shows up in camp
show, too.)  
     The love story begins well, but does tend to get lost in the
hurly-burly of the war, which is probably what happened for a lot of
people, but which is not particularly good story-writing or film-making.
The two  principals play off each other well in their love scenes, but
their love scenes are more tender than passionate for some reason.
     Shall I say the film was not hard enough by half on America?  This
is not an angry film, but it is sympathetic and probably new information
for a lot of people.  America seems to have made progress since those
days, even if much distance remains to be covered.  The film is strong,
the performances are strong, the look is strong.  I am happy to
recommend COME SEE THE PARADISE.

Title
Review for Fried Green Tomatoes (1991)
     FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is a film by Jon Avnet, from a novel by Fannie
Flagg.  The film stars Kathy Bates, Jessica Tandy, Mary-Louise Parker,
Mary Stuart Masterson, with a special appearance by Cicely Tyson.
     FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is more like STEEL MAGNOLIAS than THELMA AND
LOUISE in its setting, intentions, ensemble casting, and effect.  It is
a film about the friendships of women, specifically two women of the
film's now, Kathy Bates and Jessica Tandy, and two women of the film's
post-WW I then, Mary-Louise Parker and Mary Stuart Masterson.  It is
their friendships that allow these women to survive, and flourish in
their own ways, their times and their male-dominated worlds.  But unlike
THELMA & LOUISE, there nothing of the overt rebellion and the final
joyous-violent withdrawal.  These women, these Southern women, mean to
survive and persist, not rebel and die.
     In terms of its effect on this audience of one, FRIED GREEN
TOMATOES is not the radicalizing experience THELMA & LOUISE was last
spring.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is basically a comedy of manners that has
nothing new to say about women, the South, or anything else.  Its
message is hackneyed, but may be somewhat empowering to some, and
certainly uplifting for most.  This is a feel-good laugher-weeper.  But
it is not going to threaten men the way THELMA & LOUISE did, and does.
     Like STEEL MAGNOLIAS, the real strength of FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is
not the story, but the cast.  And the cast is wonderful.  Kathy Bates, a
ineffectual, class-going, 40-ish, overweight, unliberated, unsatisfied
Evelyn, thrashing about for ways to refire her nearly hopeless husband
and their moribund marriage, looks and comes across like a Bette Midler
without the hand-waving.  Her life is transformed as she get acquainted
with Jessica Tandy's nursing-home character Ninny Threadgoode and gets
drawn into her stories about Ruth (Mary Stuart Masterson) and her sister
Idgie, the unconventional and free-thinking, pants-wearing, permanent
tomboy.
     Evelyn's story is mostly comedy, whereas the stories of Ruth and
Idgie are high melodrama for the most part.  This creates a certain
dramaturgic schizophrenia, and undermines the importance of Evelyn's
story, relatively unexceptional as it is.  I'm assuming that Ninny is
Idgie's older sister, but the film annoyingly hints time and again that
she might be Idgie herself.  This is one of several vague points that
first-time director Avnet indulges himself in, to no good effect.
     Jessica Tandy is a national treasure and with each performance
becomes even better.  In DRIVING MISS DAISY, she gave a finely tuned
portrait of a Southern Jewish woman over a long and tumultuous period in
history; it is hard to imagine anyone surpassing that performance.  But
she may have done so as Ninny, the ancient rememberer of vanished times,
town, and people, who at first seems a little senile.  But we get to
understand her and love her at exactly the same pace that Evelyn does.
Ninny is an 81-year-old who is not afraid of death and who is still
fascinated by life and the dynamics of friendship.
     Mary-Louise Parker plays Ruth, the good, conventional, nurturing
woman whose life is saved by the friendship of Idgie.  Parker plays Ruth
with an admirable and delicate blend of strength and frailty.  There is
something Parker does with her upper lip and nostrils, something we saw
a little of in GRAND CANYON, that completely conveys pain and
willingness to survive the pain.
     Mary Stuart Masterson is Idgie, who manages to avoid mannish
caricatures even while being a woman who has rejected conventional
femininity.  It seemed pretty obvious to me that Idgie was a lesbian who
loved Ruth, but somehow in the movie Ruth never seems to catch on.  The
latter has occasion several time to suggest that Idgie will be happy
when she "settles down," even though Idgie tells Ruth "I'm as settled
down as I'm ever going to be."  About this and about the Idgie-Ruth
relationship in general, the film seems unnecessarily coy and vague.
     All in all, I think FRIED GREEN TOMATOES is pretty good flick.
It's manipulative and presses all the emotional buttons with a slightly
heavy touch.  It makes mandatory passes at all the Southern Themes --
racism, the Klan, decay, Southern men, the plight of the black people,
corruption, -- but they are strictly for the record and are not
particularly heartfelt.  The value of friendship, of women's
friendships, specifically, is heartfelt and sincere, the sure moral
center of the movie.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES has its faults, but it does
some have excellences, too, the acting not being the least of them.
     Therefore, I recommend that you see FRIED GREEN TOMATOES at a
bargain matinee.  If it really clicks for you, you can take what you
save on the first ticket and apply it to the next.

Title
Review for Ten to Chi to (1990)
     HEAVEN AND EARTH is a Japanese costume drama by Haruki Kadokawa,
who is inter alia a Shinto priest.  The story pits two feudal warlords
against each other, one young, spiritual, dedicated to preserving his
domain, the other older, materialistic, ambitious to conquer all Japan
and be the next shogun.
     In a sense HEAVEN AND EARTH is organized like a traditional epic,
such as the Iliad or the Bhagavad-Gita, in that it begins in medias res
and concludes inconclusively, focusing on battles as physical
manifestations of spiritual struggles.  But for the modern, Western
viewer, it's merely inconclusive.
     The stars of the film are the costume designer, the
cinematographer, and the horse wranglers.  I went to the film for the
spectacle, the color, and the texture and so was not disappointed.  As a
dramatic vehicle, it is pretty weak, at least to an American viewer.
Two hours of a grim-faced, silent men staring relentlessly into the
infinite makes it pretty hard for your humble reviewer to learn anything
about character development.  When people change, they just do it
without much motivation or preparation.  When characters die, they just
die and it hardly seems important whether it was disease or suicide.
     But this is not to say the film is not interesting or worth seeing.
It is eye-filling.  The costumes are positively stunning.  The scenery
magnificent, even though most of the exteriors were shot in Alberta.
Rich, saturated colors, almost as painterly as early Technicolor, visual
drama in every shot.  There is a sequence in cherry-blossom time that is
not to be believed.
     There is narration by Stuart Whitman to get us up to speed with the
historical events; otherwise the events would be nearly inaccessible to
a Westerner.  This part of Japanese history may or may not be well-known
in Japan, but the Battle of Kawanakajima is nothing I know anything
about.  Apparently, research was a major budget item here with authentic
restagings of the battles, attention to traditional strategy, and a
simulation of actual troop movement.  Not being a military history buff
myself, what I saw a the amazing spectacle of thousands of men in red
and black armor, even more thousands of flags and banners.  The
influence of Kurasawa and especially RAN is pretty obvious and ironic in
its way.  This movie cost $42 million dollars, every one of which is
visible on the screen, whereas Kurosawa has to go overseas to fund his
masterpieces and has not been liked in his homeland for decades.
     HEAVEN AND EARTH is a pretty picture, but it is not a great movie.
However, I can recommend it with reservations to at least the
Japanophiles amongst us.

Title
Review for Blizhnij krug (1992)
     THE INNER CIRCLE is a film by Andrei Konchalovsky, based on a true
story.  The film stars Tom Hulce and Lolita Davidovich.  Rated PG-13,
due to violence, subject matter.  Filmed in the Kremlin.
     THE INNER CIRCLE is the story of Ivan Sanshin (Tom Hulce), who
almost randomly becomes Stalin's personal projectionist, and his wife,
Anastasia (Lolita Davidovich).  Both are naive peasants transported to
Thirties' Moscow, where they share a basement apartment with seven other
people.  Ivan worships the Minister of Defense, "the first Red soldier,"
and Anastasia worships Ivan, her new husband.  Gradually, he moves into
the Inner Circle around Stalin (played by Russian actor Alexandre Zbruev
in letter-perfect makeup).  He begins to accrue the benefits of the
elite, but must keep his employment a secret even from Anastasia.
     Privilege comes at an enormous cost to both ideals and personal
lives.  Anastasia wants to adopt the orphaned daughter of "Enemies of
the State," who are Jewish to boot; such an association could mean his
own death, and at a minimum exposes him to sinister KGB influences.
Other, worse conflicts and disaster await the hapless Sanshins.
     At one point Anastasia asks Ivan, "Who do you love more, me or
Comrade Stalin?"  Without missing a beat or a thought, Ivan replies,
"Comrade Stalin, of course."  The film has occasion to return to this
dialog with no small amount of irony later on, as the Sanshins explore
together and separately the real meaning of Ivan's answer.
     The story follows Ivan until 1953, the day of Stalin's funeral.
Fifteen hundred mourners died that day in the crush and Ivan finds
something else to believe in beside his Master.
     Andre Konchalovsky is a Russian director who came to the United
States in the Seventies.  In this country, he's had his ups and downs
(RUNAWAY TRAIN and TANGO & CASH), but it was in Russia that he did his
best work, such as the 1979 epic SIBERIADE.  THE INNER CIRCLE must rank
with his best work in either country.  The movie was filmed mostly last
summer before the coup d'etat became the coup de grace for the Soviet
state.  Konchalovsky was given access to the Kremlin and the KGB
headquarters.  He recreates the flavor of the Stalinist years partly by
the unceasing contrast between the shoddy lives of the people with
tsaristic splendors of the lives of the elite; he also makes us feel the
terror and underlying fear that pervaded the lives of almost all,
including elites.
     One who seems above it all was the KGB chief Beria, played by Bob
Hoskins.  Hoskins uses his natural cuteness, which as spoiled some other
recent appearances, to great advantage here to suggest the charming
ruthlessness of the little man with owlish glasses who nearly replaced
his Master (Beria was executed for treason by the other members of the
top rung a few months after Stalin's death to forestall Beria's
ambitions and his enormous power).  Beria seems to spend most of his
time grinning at a secret and watching the others condemn themselves.
     The first acting honors inevitably must go to Tom Hulce, who uses
of little of his AMADEUS zaniness to make Ivan sweet, naive, tragic,
cruel without meaning to be, forgiving, loving, torn, a complex peasant
who loves to watch the cows being herded past his bedroom window on
their way to the slaughterhouse.  The early where Ivan demonstrates his
mastery of the film projector is a stand-alone masterpiece of the charm
of showing off.
     But one ought also to recognize the impressive job of work turned
in by Lolita Davidovich, who impressed me enormously in BLAZE, a film
made interesting by her presence.  In an odd way, Anastasia is a little
like the young Blaze Starr, a country girl who never entirely leaves her
country roots behind and whose life is dependent on how well she can
manipulate the men who manipulate her; Blaze succeeds to some extent,
Anastasia fails tragically.
     One thing I have a problem with is the actors' Slavic accents.  If
we are to pretend that they are speaking Russian, why do they have
Russian accents?  Would they sound as accent-free as native speakers
sound to each other?  And if they must speak English with heavy Russian
accents, why can't they do it consistently?  Hulce and Davidovich both
suffer from occasional lapses, and make this particular movie convention
all the more obviously dubious.
     I should also mention the work of Bess Meyer as the grown up Katya,
the little girl that Anastasia wanted to adopt.  Katya grew up in a
state orphanage and is completely inculcated in the cult of her parents'
murderer.  She faces a dubious future as the child of Enemies of the
People, as a Jew, and a frail young woman with a suspicious and
persistent cough.  She appears at the end of the film and makes a most
memorable job of her relatively small part.
     The final irony is the real Ivan, Alexander Ganshin, is a vigorous
man in his eighties, still living in Moscow, and still utterly devoted
to his long-dead, long-discredited Master.
     THE INNER CIRCLE is an important film, which I can urge you to seek
out and see whatever you have to pay.  I don't know how widely it is
being distributed (in the Seattle area, it is showing exclusively at the
Harvard Exit), but I suspect that initially, at least, you will need to
hunt it up.  Do so.
     (THE INNER CIRCLE was selected to be the opening film of the Berlin
Film Festival, by the way.)

Title
Review for Tous les matins du monde (1991)
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is a French film directed by Alain
Corneau, from a script by Corneau and Pascal Quignard.  It stars
Jean-Pierre Marielle, Gerard Depardieu, Guillaume Depardieu, Anne
Brochet, and Carole Richert.  Unrated, includes male and female nudity.
In French with English subtitles.
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is as serious, slow-paced, and sadly
beautiful as the viola da gamba music that pervades the film.  The story
of the film concentrates on the conflict between the austere, cenobitic
master of the viola da gamba (the ancestor of the modern cello),
Monsieur de Sainte-Colombe -- whose name is otherwise unknown -- and a
hack seeking fame and fortune in the court of Louis XIV, Marin Marais.
Their personal conflict symbolizes the war between art and commercial
success, a subject as relevant today as in the late 17th Century.
     TOUS LES MATINS has been compared to no great purpose to AMADEUS, a
movie with an entirely different background, tone, style, and focus; the
Mozart of AMADEUS sees no conflict between living like courtier and
being a great artist and the subject of that film is an examination of
the question "What is genius?"  The genius in TOUS LES MATINS lives a
life dedicated to fifteen-hour practice days and rural simplicity; he
refuses to go to Versailles to play for le Roi du Soleil, the Sun King,
just as he refuses to publish his compositions.
     A more useful comparison might be made between TOUS LES MATINS and
BARRY LYNDON, Stanley Kubrick's much maligned masterpiece (okay, so Ryan
O'Neil wasn't the greatest casting choice, but everything else about it
was a stunning experience): both films have a deliberate pace that is
guaranteed to put off most Americans accustomed to the rhythms of TV and
Hollywood movies.  And both films are virtually a series of tableaux
vivants, still lifes recreated on film, with a painterly style of design
and composition and lighting that delights and fascinates from beginning
to end.
     The script, written by the director Alain Corneau and Pascal
Quignard, is based on Quignard's novel.  The film runs 114 minutes, and
you will probably feel either caught up in something you would rather
never end or you will feel every one of those minutes in your keister.
The plot is minimal:  relationships develop and change among the small
cast.  There are few characters outside the principals, there are only a
few moments of humor or sex.  There are long, long head shots, a
voice-over narrative by Depardieu pere, much chiaroscuro, detailed
period accuracy, and wonderful music.  There is also some talk about
what the purpose of music is that helps to clarify to rather mysterious,
unknowable Sainte-Colombe.  And finally, there are some individual
moments that have to be considered small epiphanies for the viewer, as
when Marais leads a full baroque court orchestra in a thumping version
of his most beautiful composition -- an utterly astounding scene
probably by itself worth the price of a ticket for some of us.  Or the
very end of the film, which made me gasp out loud and cry, so moving, so
beautifully earned, so right was it.
     The cast is perfect.  The center is Jean-Pierre Marielle
(Sainte-Colombe), a veteran actor who has appeared in films such as COUP
DE TORCHON and URANUS.  He walks that fine line between sainthood and
madness; he lives to play and retreats from the world into his music and
his visions.  He is not likable, I doubt that any saint would be, but he
is irresistible and powerful.  Anne Brochet, who played Roxanne in the
Depardieu CYRANO DE BERGERAC (1990), is every bit as strong as
Madeleine, Sainte-Colombe's older daughter.  She is the link between her
father and Marais in life and in death.  Carole Richert plays the
younger daughter, the daughter who is not a slave to her father's
obsessions.
     The two Depardieus, father and son, play Marin Marais as the
middle-aged "successful" courtier and as the raw youngster who first
presents himself to become Sainte-Colombe's student.  Gerard Depardieu
puts on a fearless performance, especially the opening sequence, a long
close-up of the ruined face of a failed, foppish man who finally knows
he's a hack, and at the end as he finds and redeems himself.  Guillaume
Depardieu, the 21-year-old son, has a lighter acting style and a strong
resemblance to his famous father as well as to Julian Sands.
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE has proved to be an enormous success in
France, where it sold 2 million tickets in a year, sparked a revival of
interest in French baroque music, and won seven Cesars (the French
Oscars) -- best picture, director, music, and supporting actress
(Brochet), amongst them.  The soundtrack featuring the viola da gamba of
Jordi Savali and the music of Marais, Sainte-Colombe, Couperin, and
Lully has been a success in its own right wherever the film has played.
     In the U.S., the film's success will be limited to the art-house
circuit and not even everyone there will like it for its pace and
plotlessness.  For those willing or able, or both, to give TOUS LES
MATINS DU MONDE a chance, the rewards can be enormous.  If you are one
of those, I recommend this film to you most highly.

Title
Review for Tacones lejanos (1991)
     HIGH HEELS is a film by Pedro Almodovar.  The film stars Victoria
Abril, Marisa Paredes, Ana Lizaran, Miguel Bose, and Feodor Atkine.  In
Spanish with English subtitles.  Rated R for brief nudity, profanity,
and "adult themes."
     HIGH HEELS is minor effort by a major director, another of his
satirical melodramas, but without his usual compelling coherence.  The
initial promise is of something off-beat, complex, psychological rich,
stylish and stylized.  Alas, Almodovar failed quite to live up to this
promise.  The end result is a vague, cluttered whodunit, with too many
side stories and characters that are mostly beside the point.
     The point is, after all, the relationship between the legendary pop
diva Becky Del Paramo (Marisa Paredes) and her grown daughter Rebecca
(Victoria Abril, last seen in TIE ME UP, TIE ME DOWN), a TV news anchor.
Becky hasn't seen Rebecca for 15 years when she returns to Madrid to
mount a new show.  The two women share more than a blood relationship --
they are destructively competitive of each.  In symbol of their
belligerent and similarity, Becky wears Armani and Rebecca Chanel.
     The two principal women are excellent actors and their characters
are presented in some depth and sympathy.  Unfortunately, Almodovar
chooses to more often tell us who they are, rather than show us.
Ultimately, the women in WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN are
more complete, more sympathetic, and a whole lot funnier.  Instead,
although HIGH HEELS has its moments and its lines of dark and ingenious
wit, it wants to be tearjerker, but fails to earn the right.  As for the
major male characters, one is a oversexed, another is sexy, but mostly
they are the usual drones in the Almodovar hive.
     As a piece of design, HIGH HEELS comes up to the usual high
standard of Almodovar films.  Likewise, the photography is tropically
color-saturated, with sensitive use of natural light.
     In general, I would not recommend HIGH HEELS as an introduction to
Almodovar.  See either (or both of the other films mentioned above, or
LAW OF DESIRE, if you want to know what the excitement is about.  If you
already know and dote on Almodovar, as I do, then you will want to see
HIGH HEELS, despite its limitations.  In that case, I suggest you seek
out a cheap matinee.

Title
Review for Player, The (1992)
     THE PLAYER is a film directed by Robert Altman and written by
Michael Tolkin, based on his novel.  It stars Tim Robbins, Greta
Scacchi, Whoopi Goldberg, Fred Ward, Brion James, Peter Gallagher,
Cynthia Stevenson, Vincent D'Onofrio, Dean Stockwell, Richard E. Grant,
Lyle Lovett, Sydney Pollack, with dozens of cameos.  Rated R for
profanity, mature themes.
     THE PLAYER opens with a witty and self-mocking "homage" to the long
tracking shot that opens Orson Welles's TOUCH OF EVIL, an even longer,
equally amazing tracking shot that scans an unnamed Hollywood studio and
introduces the major players by eavesdropping on the busy conversations,
especially the writers pitching their stories to Tim Robbins playing
Griffin Mill, enfant terrible on his way out.  In the process, we also
start the endless and fascinating succession of cameos that help give
this movie its inside/outside/upside/downside mixture of flick and
documentary as we encounter Buck Henry, the writer of THE GRADUATE,
pitching a sequel, and Altman's protege Alan Rudolph pitching a
"politely political psychic thriller with heart ... GHOST meets THE
MANCHURIAN."
     Before the movie is over, Altman and Tolkin have pitched the idea
of the movie to us, the very story we've just seen.  It is a dazzling
bright and cynical satire, if either shallow or accurate; in the
self-referant, self-absorbed Hollywood atmosphere of the film, it is
might hard to know the dancer from the dance, the satire or the thing
being satirized.  For example, what about the character of Greta
Scacchi?  Like so many Hollywood women, this one is all surface with no
past, no future apart from her relationship to her man or men.  Are you
going to be satisfied by the ending?  It is blunt and counters a lot of
rules.  You may like that, its cynicism,, its wit, its realpolitik, as
it were, or you may feel cheated.
     I think you will like Altman's direction.  He has returned to the
multi-leveled, half-improvised conversations, the imaginative camera
work, the witty references.  For one example, Altman shows us a plein
air breakfast meeting with Burt Reynolds and someone else talking at one
table in the foreground while the mike concentrates on the background
conversation of Robbins and his boss (Brion James); the camera shoots
through the gap between Reynolds and friend and moves right past them as
it closes in on the rear table.  When Robbins leaves, the camera pulls,
the mike pulls back, and Reynolds is still talking.  Did I explain this
at all understandably?  No matter, really, when you see it, you will
recognize and, I assume, admire it.
     For another example, there's a big charity party and one of those
Hollywood TV reporters commenting over the hubbub of the crowd and the
camera shows an amazing collection of recognizable faces; we learn this
a black-and-white party and there's Cher dressed in red.  Carole Lombard
gave the first black-and-white Hollywood party in the 1930s and Norma
Shearer, the reigning queen, showed up in red; Lombard chewed Shearer
out, even though Clark Gable, Lombard's future husband (whom she had met
for the first time that night) told her that one did not chew out Norma
Shearer, who was married to Irving Thalberg.  No one chews out Cher.
     THE PLAYER is filled with the constant tug between the history of
the Golden Era and the pressures of the current moment.  The head of
studio security (Fred Ward) praises the old movies (he talks about the
Wellesian tracking shot during the Altmanian one), but recognizes no
titles after 1950, it seems.  The walls are decorated by 30s movie
posters.  No one has time to go to movies, but they consider how to do
without writers altogether.
     The individual performances are uniformly excellent.  Tim Robbins
has never had a better role (except perhaps for the much smaller part in
BULL DURHAM).  His babyish face makes his ruthlessness all the more
alarming.  Peter Gallagher plays his rival Larry Levy as a handsome
serpent.  Vincent D'Onofrio is particularly effective as David Kahane,
an angry and not very successful writer.  And then there's very strong
and heartbreaking performance of Cynthia Stevenson whose fate is by all
reports, as well as her performance, painfully accurate.
     I also enjoyed the singer Lyle Lovett in a role that was a major
comic relief, but I wasn't too pleased with the performance of his
partner played by Whoopi Goldberg, not that she's any less than
wonderful, but she plays her usual character to such a degree that it
hard not to think we're looking at another cameo.  In addition to the
multitudinous as-themselves appearances (Bruce Willis and Julia Roberts
are especially witty and self-parodying), there are many small roles
filled admirably.  For example, there are Dean Stockwell and Richard E.
Grant as the agent-writer team who manage to send up the pieties of the
message script with a brilliant sell-out.  Then there's Sydney Pollack,
the director, playing a lawyer as the very model of detached and
charming cynicism.
     THE PLAYER is a film of great richness and (perhaps) depth, of
admirable technique and successful results.  I think that for the
critics and film students the question will be to what end was all this
brilliance served up.  THE PLAYER is so intricately self-referential
that I despair of trying to decide whether it is a first-rate satire, a
celluloid noose, as Jeff Shannon in the Seattle Times wrote, or whether
it is less subversive than it is part of the mainstream it appears to
attack.  Altman, Tolkin, and their army of stars are the establishment,
the Industry, major players who are showing us Hollywood As It Really
Is,, acerbically, wittily, the ultimate inside joke, after all.  In the
film, one character lists the ingredients a successful movie must have:
suspense, laughter, hope, heart, nudity, sex.  THE PLAYER has all of
these, by the strangest of coincidences.  I suspect the film is like the
worm Ouroboros that swalloweth its own tail, both in structure and
intent.
     In the meantime, whatever the meaning, cynical or absurdist, THE
PLAYER is a great film, as good as Altman has ever made, including
M*A*S*H*, NASHVILLE, and McCABE AND MRS MILLER.

Title
Review for Distinguished Gentleman, The (1992)
     THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN is a film directed by Jonathan Lynn,
from a script by Marty Kaplan.  It stars Eddie Murphy, James Garner, Joe
Don Baker, Lane Smith, Sheryl Lee Ralph, Grant Shaud, Kevin McCarthy.
Rated R, for language and mild sex scenes.
     THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN is Eddie Murphy's most likable film is
a long time.  Working for Disney's Hollywood Pictures, he brings a
freshness and sense of having fun to this film that have been missing
from his most recent Paramount vehicles, BOOMERANG and HARLEM NIGHTS.
Neither does he have a mean-spirited, violent action film this time out,
making it altogether easier to watch.  The script was written by Marty
Kaplan, a Disney executive who once wrote speeches for Walter Mondale
and who has some first-hand experience with Washington, D.C., and its
less endearing folkways.  Kaplan also edited the "Harvard Lampoon" and
has some pretty good academic credentials (Harvard, Cambridge,
Stanford).  The end result is an argument for the idea that a good
script is still important.
     The story, as you may know, concerns a small-time con man who uses
"name recognition" to get a seat in the U. S. House of Representative.
Murphy qua con man is probably as good an idea for letting Murphy be
Murphy as turning Robin Williams loose as the genie in ALADDIN.  He gets
to do almost all his shticks -- Jewish, ghetto Black, WASP, Black
without Soul (in the words of B. B. King in John Landis' AMAZON WOMEN ON
THE MOON), females of various sort -- without doing his fag-bashing
Effeminate Black (he limits his homophobia to one line: "You're not
going to pull any of that homo shit, are you?").  Murphy proved his
genius by selecting this script, then rest is more or less on autopilot.
     He also lets himself be backed up by a lot of talent.  Lane Smith
as the venal Chairman of a particularly venal Congressional committee
almost dominates the film; one reviewer pointed to Smith's performance
here as a comic variation on his role as Richard Nixon in the TV
miniseries, "Final Days."  Kevin McCarthy, as the insider superlawyer,
has a great scene instructing the freshman Congressman on the facts on
PACs and foundations and fundraisers.  James Garner puts in a cameo at
the beginning of the film.  Grant Shaud, who plays the neurotic director
on TV's "Murphy Brown," lights up the scenes he's in.  Victoria Rowell
is convincing as the public-interest lobbyist who helps open the new
Congressman's eyes to the slime around him.  Sheryl Lee Ralph was funny,
charming, and outrageous as Miss Loretta; we've previously seen her as
Robert DeNiro's mistress in the production of the same name.  Joe Don
Baker plays a major lobbyist with suitable disregard for the niceties.
And Sarah Carson is the beautiful, frosty staffer who has a unique way
of serving with satisfaction.
     It's not a perfect movie -- the transformation is more magical than
motivated -- but it offers some engaging fun as Murphy's character wakes
up to the corruption around him.  It's a movie that wants to take the
same moral ground as MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON, but only achieves
the lesser moments of Capraesque preachiness.  (Frank Capra III is
listed in the credits, for what that's worth -- irony if nothing else.)
It has energy and good intentions, and while the humor is not of the
laugh-out-loud variety, it is entertaining.  And it is less cynical,
more optimistic than the trailer had led me to believe, and that is a
relief.

Title
Review for City of Joy (1992)
     CITY OF JOY is a film directed by Roland Joffe and written by Mark
Medoff, from a book by Dominique Lapierre.  It stars Patrick Swayze,
Pauline Collins, Om Puri, Shabana Azmi, and Art Malik.  It is rated
PG-13 for violence, mature themes, mild profanity.
     CITY OF JOY is an earnest, well-intended film meant to praise those
who struggle against the odds.  Joffe is a kind of British Oliver Stone
in his heavy-handedness and self-righteousness, but he is the director
who brought us THE KILLING FIELDS, THE MISSION, and FAT MAN AND LITTLE
BOY.  He is not afraid of movies about ideas that he believes in.
Unfortunately, he is afraid of letting us think for ourselves.
     The script is freely adapted from Dominique Lapierre's 1985
best-seller.  Mark Medoff and Joffe have converted the Polish priest
laboring in the slums of Calcutta to an Irish nurse, played charmingly
by Pauline Collins.  The American doctor Max Lowe, an minor character in
the novel, has become the focus of the movie to accommodate the star
appeal of Patrick Swayze.  Further Hollywoodization comes in the form of
elaborate monsoons, rioting and fire bombs, and melodramatic and
sadistic heavies, especially the character by Art Malik.  Joffe is
constantly moving in the direction of epic, while the story strains to
pull back to the intimate concerns of the poor ricksha pullers, their
families, the lepers, and the others living on the bottom level of this
amazing city.  One cannot help but compare this glossy package with the
gritty, wise, and wonderful SALAAM BOMBAY, produced at a fraction of the
cost of this film and at many times the insight and power.
     This is not to say that CITY OF JOY is a contemptible film, merely
a specimen case of how even a well-intentioned big-budget film can lose
sight of what is important.  It is a problematic production, in any
case.  The first problem being the presence of Patrick Swayze, who is
said to have gone to great lengths to secure the part of Dr. Max.  At
best, we would have to conclude that Swayze is working here on the
extreme outer limit of his skills as an actor.  Angst barely eludes him,
although petulance does appear to be within his grasp.  The mere
presence of a Western man in this third-world story sets off alarums;
certainly, Joffe's MISSION suffered from the white-messiah syndrome, as
have most movies about apartheid in the last several years (although you
might look around for an black, South African film MAPANTSULA that was
circulating two years ago).  To be fair, Joffe and Medoff seem somewhat
aware of this and ensure that Swayze never wins a fight and that his
life is saved by an Indian.  Still he does tend to lecture the Indians
about standing up to the Godfather who rules their lives.
     The real satisfaction of this film comes from the excellent Indian
actors, especially Om Puri as the man whose life Swayze keeps
interfering in; Puri is nervous, weak, brave, hesitant, rash; he's no
Hollywood beauty, with his pock-marked nose, but he's a beautiful
performer.  Puri's character, Hasari, is the heart and soul of CITY OF
JOY, and with the contributions of Shabana Azmi who plays his wife,
embodies the nobility and dignity that Joffe would like to reduce to
manipulative sentimentality.
     Other strengths come in the cinematography of Peter Biziou and the
graceful music of Ennio Morricone, which together give CITY OF JOY much
of its power and appeal.

Title
Review for Swing Kids (1993)
     SWING KIDS is a film directed by Thomas Carter, from a script by
Jonathan Bard Manulis. It stars Robert Sean Leonard, Christian Bale,
Frank Whaley, Barbara Hershey, and Kenneth Branagh (uncredited). Rated
PG-13 for language, violence, and adult situations.
     SWING KIDS, from Disney's Hollywood Pictures, is a film that was
hyped, then dropped, then finally released. I don't know why -- if but
someone in the know wants to write me, I'd be ever so appreciative.  I
wonder if perhaps the studio didn't lose its nerve for a while. After
all, the subject and the setting -- American swing music and Nazi
Germany on the eve of World War II -- are not the kind of contemporary
references that are most likely to attract audiences, especially those
younger audiences. Then, too, Disney was never able to sell its
excellent, but ill-named, 1992 musical NEWSIES to a large audience.
SWING KIDS is more of a drama cum dance picture, certainly not a
musical, but there are similarities, not the least of which is the
presence of Christian Bale in both. In NEWSIES, he was the hero, the
voice of individual freedom against the monolithic power of the
newspaper publisher. In SWING KIDS, he starts as one of the rebels
against Nazism who later succumbs to its promises and lies. In both
films, he has registered an excellent performance, with this most
recent one being all the more interesting because of the mixed messages
of his good-bad character, Thomas.
     Thomas's friend, and later enemy, Peter, is the hero here.  He is
played by Robert Sean Leonard, who was the suicidal young actor in
Peter Weir's DEAD POETS SOCIETY. Leonard turns in a wonderful
performance as the confused young man, whose original drop-out
opposition to the Nazis becomes confused, blurred, then clarified and
hardened by his experiences as "an H.J. (Hitler Jugend, or Hitler
Youth) by day and Swing Kid by night," as Thomas's formula put it.
     The dilemma the boys find themselves in is strongly reminiscent of
the Jewish boy who passes as an H.J. in EUROPA, EUROPA. This latter
film made a much stronger case, and demonstration, of who the Nazis
were, what they were doing, and what the moral and practical situation
was for everyone else. Both films concern themselves with identity,
with being co-opted by a seductive enemy, with the problem of staying
neutral and uninvolved in a world that insists you take sides, with the
problem of surviving. Peter is in no way as conflicted as the Salomon
(in EUROPA, EUROPA), and SWING KIDS is in no way as gut-wrenching or
mind-twisting as the German film. However, the American film is good,
effective, and interesting in its own way. Not only does it provide
several fine performances, including Frank Whaley as the intellectual
and musical center of the Swing Kids and Barbara Hershey as Peter's
frightened mother, as well as Kenneth Branagh as a slick, oleaginous
Gestapo officer (and when you write tell me why Branagh chose to
receive no credit for this part), but it also gives us several well
integrated dance scenes and lots of wonderful swing music.
     The dance numbers are naturalistic and exciting and often
humorous. The young dancers display a kind of raw enthusiasm for
jitterbug that is chaotic and as un-Nazi as anything one could
imagine.  Some reviewers have objected to making swing a metaphor for
freedom, but to me it seems natural and earned. Anyone who experienced
the first years of rock'n'roll knows how rebellious and in the broadest
sense political mere music and dance can be. Certainly, anyone who was
a part of the hippie "movement" knows that music and dress are not
merely the symbols, but the very stuff, of rebellion and revolution. To
the film's Nazis, swing was "Neger-Kike" music, Jewish Benny Goodman
was banned and his records were relabeled Gene Krupa to get around a
censor who hadn't caught to the fact that Count Basie wasn't the ruler
of some country. But it was a rebellion-by-avoidance and it was
unformed as a moral force or position; the Swing Kids could be as
anti-semitic as the H.J.'s. The dramatic tension in the film is the
development of swing as a moral idea, not merely adolescent rebellion
against authority and responsibility.
     The only problem I had with the film was its ending which seemed
forced and unearned. That and the fact that I am still unclear when the
Swings Kids were an historical fact or only the interesting invention
of the writer; so that's the third thing you can write to me about, if
you know. I can recommend SWING KIDS, even at full ticket price.  It is
an irresistible package of great music, good dancing, and an important
story.

Title
Review for Universal Soldier (1992)
     The following are not reviews per se, but rather brief notices "for
the record" of three films I have seen recently, none of which appears
to deserve a more extended discussion by this reviewer:
     COOL WORLD is an animated-live action film directed by Ralph Bakshi
and stars Kim Bassinger, Gabriel Byrne, and Brad Pitt.  If cool means
unemotional or uninvolved, then this film is well named.  To say that
the most interesting performance by the live actors was by Kim Basinger
ought to be give you some idea of one of the film's problems.
Basinger's Holli Would is a monster of ego and libido, but at least she
wants to do something.  Gabriel Byrne, who is quite a creditable actor
normally, has no idea was to do with this part as the ex-con cartoonist
who tunes into the Cool World; he is wooden and silly with his wide-eyed
stares and dropped-jaw expression that tides him over in lieu of acting.
Brad Pitt, who made a mark for himself in THELMA & LOUISE, makes a mess
of his role as the morality cop.  It is absolutely the worst interface
I've ever seen between a live actor and a cartoon.  A few of the
backgrounds are interesting and the last ten minutes is inventive and
funny, but it is overall a film to be avoided by all but the most
die-hard followers of animation.  For the rest of us, it is mostly ugly,
repetitive, juvenile, and overblown, and if you say it's a satire of
Hollywood I say "So what?" because it doesn't work.
     UNIVERSAL SOLDIER is a film directed by Roland Emmerich, from a
script by Richard Rothstein, Christopher Leitch, and Dean Devlin.  It
stars Jean-Claude Van Damme, Dolph Lundgren, Ally Walker, with Jerry
Orbach; it is rated R, for violence, nudity, and language.  This is an
unconvincing and unbelievable kick-ass science fantasy that is relieved
by Van Damme's rather cute imitation Schwarzenegger, by J-C's nude
scene, and most importantly by Ally Walker as the cocky TV reporter who
gets swept up by the deadly and extended contest between J-C and
Lundgren, the maniac who can't be killed; Walker is far and away the
most interesting aspect of this uninteresting movies.  The major premise
of the film is obviously bogus that the rest of the film becomes
immediately pointless, unless extreme violence is its own reward.
Walker is funny, J-C is sort of funny, Lundgren is impossible.  If you
say that Emmerich the German director achieves an near parody of the
James Cameron rollercoaster style, I say "So what?"; parody needs a
point of view.  I turned my face a few times, but otherwise I just was
marking time and getting away for a couple of hours from an especially
hot Sunday in Seattle.  Not recommended at any price, except to the most
rabid fans of Van Damme.
     HONEY, I BLEW UP THE KID, directed by Randal Kleiser, from a story
by Garry Goodrow, stars Rick Moranis, Marcia Strassman, and Robert
Oliveri and is rated PG.  This sequel to the sweet and inventive HONEY,
I SHRUNK THE KIDS still has Rick Moranis, who is always fun to watch,
but otherwise is a pointless and exploitative effort to cash in on the
success of the original.  Tell me it's a parody of the 50s obsession
with giant mutants, especially THE AMAZING COLOSSAL MAN, and I'll say
"So what?"; it has nothing to say about these films or the period they
grew out of.  This film adds nothing to the f/x vocabulary and in fact
the special effects are pretty clumsy and obvious.  Part of the problem
is that tiny is fascinating but gigantic is merely dangerous.  The best
moments are when Moranis, the gifted ex-tempore comic actor, has to
ad-lib around the undirectable twins that play Adam, the ultimate in the
terrible twos, especially the scene when Moranis proposes a lullaby and
the kid wants another tune; it is obvious (and has been confirmed in a
feature story) that the scene was improvised because the kid didn't want
to hear the song the script called for, and as such it is tender,
charming, direct, and natural.  Something most of this terrible sequel
is not.
     The film is being shown with a charming Disney short about a
discarded rockinghorse that tries to lure its child away from his video
game.  Part computer animation, it is brief but completely winning.
Almost repays the cost of the matinee ticket.

Title
Review for My Own Private Idaho (1991)
     MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO is a film by Gus Van Sant.  It stars River
Phoenix, Keanu Reeves, William Reichert, and Udo Kier.  It was written
and directed by Van Sant, "with additional dialogue by William
Shakespeare."  Rated R, due to strong language and nudity.
     MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO very much continues the themes of Gus Van
Sant's two previous feature-length films, MALA NOCHE and DRUGSTORE
COWBOY, that of the important lives of the marginalized in our society.
MALA NOCHE was about a gay store clerk in Portland's Skid Road who falls
in love with an illegal Mexican immigrant; the love is returned by
exploitation, and in the end it is an open question of who was
exploiting whom (among other open questions).  DRUGSTORE COWBOY,
something of a commercial success, profiled the lives of a three young
junkies, people who liked to get high more than anything else.  MY OWN
PRIVATE IDAHO is concerned with two male hustlers and their two searches
for what was missing in their lives.  These movies are odysseys, seedy
road pictures.  Unfortunately, I don't think MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO is as
successful overall, as it predecessors, especially the miraculous MALA
NOCHE.
     This is not to say that MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO does not have some
wonderful qualities, some memorable moments, but it also has lapses, and
the whole movie fails to come together for me with the kind of
cohesiveness of the other movies.
     The casting is certainly strong.  River Phoenix is truly wonderful
as the gay hustler, Mike Waters, from whose point of view we mostly see
the movie.  Phoenix gives us a performance that is completely committed
to his character.  Waters is sweet, damaged, naive, funny, and sad; he's
also a severe narcoleptic, who is seized by a irresistible sleep when
he's under stress.  He has to survive his affliction to hustle his johns
(such Stanley Hainesworth and Udo Kier) and an occasional woman.  She
reminds him of his long lost mother (Grace Zabriskie) and zonks out
before he can even strip.  As his best friend, Scott Favor (Keanu
Reeves) says: "Some hustler, huh?"
     Reeves' Favor deserves a lengthier discussion than is appropriate
for this brief notice.  Favor has sex with men for the money; he says if
you give it away you start to become a "fairy," a quality that would not
fit into his long-term goals.  His character is guarded, even as he is
Waters' guardian.  Favor is a rich boy who is hustling mostly to piss
off his dad the mayor of Portland.  Favor also is the subject some of
the most audacious chance-taking I've seen for a long time in a movie.
The movie draws a very direct comparison between Favor and Prince Hal of
Shakespeare's HENRY IV Parts I and II.  The Falstaff (cum Fagin), Bob
Pigeon, is played by the director of WINTER KILLS, William Reichert.
The two of them exchange dialog lifted from Shakespeare and updated to
include references to leather and gay bars and such.  It is this device,
this conceit of Van Sant's, that makes or breaks MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO.
I felt it broke it; for me it did not work, it never got above the level
of a cute idea.  To have Favor like Hal, to have Pigeon like Falstaff,
would have been one thing, but to have them talk in blank verse in quite
another.
     Van Sant was daring throughout MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO and cannot be
faulted for that.  Better that he should try and occasionally stumble
than never chance anything, like most directors.  Among the things that
worked: the remarkable and witty visualization of an orgasm; the wall of
gay skin mags, whose covers start talking to us and to each other; the
tableaux vivants for the sex scenes (with hurdy-gurdy accompaniment).
He also gives us some plain, old-fashioned wonderful movie moments, such
as Mike and Scott talking over a campfire, with Mike finally getting
something off his chest that he's wanted to say for a long time, or the
Udo Kier's wonderful dance with a table lamp.  But with the
Shakespearean dialog, I think he overreached his grasp, as the saying
goes.  It is also a story that is divided into at least three stories,
all of which rambled picaresquely.  We have the search for Water's
mother, we have the story of Prince Hal/Scott Favor story, and we have
the story of street hustlers centered around Pigeon qua Fagin.  Any one
of these could have been a movie by itself and the end result of such
richness is not, unfortunately, greater richness for the audience but
instead a scattered and unfocused movie experience.
     Van Sant gives us an interesting looking movie, however, thanks to
cinematographers Eric Alan Edwards and John Campbell, as well as
interesting sounding movie due to composer Bill Stafford.
     I can recommend MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO mostly to fans who already
know Van Sant.  And to those fans, let me recommend the matinee prices.
To those of you who haven't discovered Van Sant yet, there is a lot here
and you will be rewarded for taking a chance, but look up his older
work, too.

Title
Review for Scenes from a Mall (1991)
     SCENES FROM A MALL is the new Paul Mazursky film starring Woody
Allen, Bette Midler, and the Beverly Center shopping mall.  Paul Irwin,
the "new vaudevillean," appears as the mimic.
     It's an incongruous casting idea putting Woody Allen, the ultimate
New Yorker, in a Southern California mall with Bette Midler, who may
just be the last word in ditzy rich California.  If it had worked, it
would have been brilliant; it didn't and it ain't.  All that is left to
us the audience is assigning the blame.
     First off, there's Mazursky, who when he's good is very, very good.
However, he seems constitutionally incapable of making two good movies
in a row.  Now, he's done nothing quite as wonderful as his early NEXT
EXIT GREENWICH VILLAGE, but his last Beverly Hills movie, the name of
which escapes me just now, had a wonderful zany chaos about it, a kind
of kitchy UP STAIRS, DOWN STAIRS, that approached at least the lost art
of the screwball comedy.  SCENES, on the other hand, instead of opening
up Beverly Hills to satire and humanization, traps us in its own
self-referential claustrophobia.  Several times, Nick and Deborah, the
major characters, almost succeed in breaking out of the mall, only to be
dragged back in by some circumstance or other.  Their failure to leave
is the movie's failure, too.
     Then, there's Woody Allen looking and sounding as natural and
naturalized as a Martian at a Ku Klux Klan rally.  He's got a
preposterous tuck of hair gathered in a teeny tiny ponytail.  That's the
signal that he's a real California sports agent/lawyer.  Allen is too
familiar to us to be anything but Woody Allen, and no one who knows
Allen thinks that he would ever be a Californian.  Neither is there
anything in his performance that in any way makes it possible for us to
make the leap of faith to enable us to forget ANNIE HALL and a lifetime
of slamming L.A.
     Finally, there's Midler, fussy and over-upholstered as usual, but
totally unable to convince us that she is a licensed psychologist and
successful self-help author.  She's not the Beverly Hills princess she
was in her previous B.H. films -- the one with Nick Nolte and company
[DOWN AND OUT IN BEVERLY HILLS] or the one with Danny DeVito [RUTHLESS
PEOPLE].  Neither is the vulgarian with the heart of gold that she's
played opposite Shelley Long [OUTRAGEOUS FORTUNE] or in BEACHES.  What
is she, who is she, how does she succeed either professionally or
personally?  She hasn't a clue how the play Deborah and we haven't a
clue how to read her.
     If this is satire, it is a cold, uncaring kind.  If it is a tribute
to SoCal culture, it misses altogether.  I think of SCENES and then of
L.A. STORY as the portrait of Lotus Land.  Steve Martin's got this movie
beat all hollow because there is love behind his movie.  There is
nothing behind Mazursky's.
     I can recommend this film only to those fans who have to see
everything with Allen and/or Midler in it.  The rest of us would be
better off shopping.

Title
Review for Stay Tuned (1992)
################################################
LITTLE NEMO: ADVENTURES IN SLUMBERLAND is an animated feature film,
directed by Masami Hata and William Hurtz and written by Chris Columbus
and Richard Outten.  The voices are provided by Mickey Rooney, Rene
Auberjonois, and Gabriel Damon.  Rated G.
Little Nemo was the great, landmark creation of Winsor McCay, who was
one the most popular, most influential cartoonists in American history.
McCay can also be considered the father of animation due to his
pioneering animated cartoon "Gertie the Dinosaur."  "Little Nemo" ran in
newspapers for two decades and was immensely popular.  Today, we can
only look at those strips in wonder and amazement and with no little
sadness at the degradation of the medium in our niggardly times.
It was because of my admiration for McCay (who also authored the surreal
strip "Dreams of the Rarebit Fiend") that I had to see this animated
film.  The film successfully recreates much of McCay's art style, eerie,
monumental dream imagery full of surprise, wit, and irrational
juxtapositions.  Unfortunately, despite the presence of some important
talent, the filmmakers hedged their bet with a number of non-McCay
intrusions.  Little Nemo himself is too cute; the mischief making
trickster too nice; there's a flying squirrel buddy; there's a major
steal from the "Night on Bare Mountain" sequence in FANTASIA; and there
is a throw-away score of songs by the same Sherman Brothers who wrote
the songs for MARY POPPINS.  Unfortunately, the filmmakers ignored the
Victor Herbert Broadway version of Little Nemo, a smash hit of the 1908
season.
Overall, I found the film charming and engaging, probably not entirely
appropriate for the youngest children, and can recommend it to you at
matinee prices or as a future video rental or purchase.
#################################################
RAPID FIRE is a film directed by Dwight Little and written by Alan
McElroy.  It stars Brandon Lee, Powers Boothe, Nick Mancuso.  Rated R,
for chopsocky violence.  This is, of course, the vehicle meant to launch
Brandon Lee, Bruce Lee's son, as a film star.  While the film is never
going to be the pet of filmschools, it does deliver its promise of a
presentable action film.  And it is less gross, less gruesome than most
of the present generation of actions films, such as those of Van Damme
or Seagal.  In style and mood, it is closer to the older Lee's
swashbuckling, kidding movies.  The story is perfectly predictable, and
the addition of Tienanmen Square and a call to political responsibility
are not meant to be taken too seriously.  However, McElroy's script does
attempt to make the hero human and likeable.  The character actors are
fun to watch, too: Tzi Ma as an Asian godfather; Powers Boothe as the
good cop; and especially, Nick Mancuso as the psycho heavy.  I think Lee
does have a future; he has presence and some competence as an actor; he
is not so intense as his dad, but rather laid-back, slightly yuppified,
non-arrogant.
I can recommend RAPID FIRE at matinee prices or as a winter video treat.
################################################
STAY TUNED is a film directed by Peter Hyams and written by Tom
S. Parker & Jim Jennewein.  It stars John Ritter, Pam Dawber, Jeffrey
Jones, and Eugene Levy.  Rated PG.  This is one of those supremely dumb
movies that I am a sucker for.  Of course, TV is too easy a target of
satire.  Of course, having former TV personalities in the cast is
obvious.  But then, again, why not, it's summertime and the living is
easy.  This is, obviously, not a film to take seriously, but it's fun
enough while it lasts to justify a matinee ticket, especially if like me
one has an irrational fondness for John Ritter, despite his willingness
to appear to total dreck like the PROBLEM CHILD flicks; I concentrate on
his other, better kind of films, the ones no one goes to, like THEY ALL
LAUGHED and that theater farce he did with Carol Burnett et al.  at the
beginning of the summer.  This is somewhere in between, mostly harmless,
and that's high praise these days.  Jeffry Jones is always fun to watch,
too, and his track record is possibly even worse than Ritter's.  
Probably, you should save this one for a really dreary winter day and
rent the video.

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA is film directed by Francis Ford Coppola,
written by James V. Hart from the novel by Bram Stoker.  The film stars
Gary Oldman, Winona Ryder, Keanu Reeves, Anthony Hopkins, Richard E.
Grant, Cary Elwes, Bill Campbell, Tom Waits, and Sadie Frost.  Rated R,
due to violence, nudity, language.
     BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA is Francis Ford Coppola's earnest effort to
create the definitive Dracula movie.  He and his writer James V. Hart
(HOOK) have dragged in the epistolary style of the original novel by
having voice-over readings of various characters' journals and letters.
And despite obvious efforts to get away from the 1927 stage version, the
vehicle, by the way, that originally launched Bela Lugosi in his strange
career as Dracula, Hart has introduced his own novelties, such as
updating vampirism to a blood disease that has to bring the AIDS
infection to any modern viewer's mind as well as novelties in his
prologue and in the reincarnation theme.  Coppola and those who labor
for him cannot touch any source material without leaving Francis Ford's
fingerprints all over it.  And any pretense that this is the "real"
Stoker novel is as misleading as claiming that APOCALYPSE NOW was the
"real" HEART OF DARKNESS.
     Now whether the Coppola interpretation of the Dracula story sounds
like a good idea is up to you.  For this viewer, the combination is a
natural.  Coppola's great visual lushness and romanticism seem ideally
suited to a story that is the sine qua non of decadent eroticism.  And
to his credit, the romantic angle is decidedly the one being emphasized
here.  Not the horror, not the gore, not even the suspense -- after
Dracula leaves his castle and Keanu Reeves behind -- but the literally
immortal love story of Vlad the Impaler and his princess.  As a result,
this Dracula is the first really sympathetic one I've ever encountered
in a long life of devouring Dracula movies.  Dracula's death is a
supreme act of love reaching across the centuries.
     Overall, I'd have to say that Coppola's DRACULA is a mixed
blessing.  Much of it is fresh, clever, even witty.  It bogs down
somewhat under its own 123-minute running time.  Some of the
performances are problematical.  The visual element drives the story
element.  A lot of the story makes no literal sense.  But in the end,
Coppola has succeeded in capturing the very essence of the 1897 novel,
vampirism as a metaphor for society's fears of sex, especially female
sexuality (a theme interestingly resonant in these days of anti-gay
legal maneuvers and religious groups).
     Coppola's DRACULA is a complete document of this metaphor.  The
costumes of Eiko Ishioka (Dracula's gold robe reminded me of that
all-too familiar Gustav Klimt painting of The Lovers), the music of
Wojciech Kilar, the production designs of Thomas Sanders, and the
complexly edited film constantly using two or three superimposed images
all conspired to give the film its unique look.  And the makeup and
wigs, especially the wonderful transformations of Dracula himself, are
masterful and fascinating.  Everything is lush, overwhelming, sumptuous,
voluptuous, and charged with strange eroticisms.
     Of the actors the film belongs first to Gary Oldman, who played
Oswald in JFK and Joe Orton in PRICK UP YOUR EARS.  He is the perfect
casting choice, a highly eccentric actor in a stylized, artificial part
driven by the controlling metaphor of the film, turning caricature into
character and a tragic character at that.  As just one example of
Oldman's achievement let me refer those of you who've seen it to the
scene where Dracula helps Harker (Reeves) shave.  It chills me to just
think about it.
     Winona Ryder as Mina seems to me very much an old-fashioned movie
star.  She has the look and style, a somewhat anti-naturalistic style,
that perfectly suits the restrained passions of the Victorian millieu.
And her accent seems a lot less strained to these American ears than
that of Reeves in the part of Mina's fiance, Jonathan Harker.  Reeves's
presence strikes me as the biggest blunder in the film; he never
connects with his part of the restrained, repressed and ambitious clerk
of the London real estate firm.  He has a high charged encounter in
Dracula's castle, an encounter that is the most overtly sexual (in the
usual sense) in the film, and yet I never felt it really touched him.
     Of the second string, Anthony Hopkins is having the most fun as the
vampire-hunter Van Helsing.  This DRACULA never develops much of the
theme of a personal struggle between Van Helsing and Dracula, and as a
result Van Helsing is more comic relief than avenging angel.  A lot of
people are going to enjoy Hopkins's over-the-top and anti-Lectorish
performance.  I found it slightly tasteless and slightly offensive,
which is the opposite of my reaction to the parallel performance Alan
Rickman put in as the comic-relief Sheriff of Nottingham in ROBIN HOOOD:
PRINCE OF THIEVES, no one should expect consistency from me.
     Otherwise, Sadie Frost is fine as Mina's friend Lucy, who precedes
her into vampiric union with Dracula.  Cary Elwes is a pretty face as
Lucy's fiance, Richard E. Grant ineffective as one of the failed
suitors and morphine-shooting proprietor of a hellish insane asylum, and
Bill Campbell unintendedly comic as the oafish American suitor.  On the
other hand, Tom Waits is a fair treat as the insectivorous Renfield.  He
has a moment when he kisses Mina's fingers through the bars of his cell
that is pretty shivery in its own right, as well as in its echo of
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.
     The first thirty minutes or so is the best: the prologue set in the
15th Century and the castle scenes before Dracula decamps for London.
Nothing that follows quite comes up those first thirty minutes for
originality and overall interest.  But the rest of the film is good
enough and in places for briefer periods approaches the level of the
opening parts.  This DRACULA achieves a quality of dreamlike lushness
and romanticism that makes it unique in the history of this subgenre.
It is erotic without a lot of overt nudity and naughty bits, it is
horrifying without a lot of the explicit gore of the usual horror film
(not that there isn't blood a plenty, but mostly just out of the frame).
Coppola has accomplished what he apparently set out to do, viz., to
redefine the vampire movie on the level of grand opera, just as he did
with APOCALYPSE NOW for the war movie and with GODFATHER for the
gangster movie.
     Consequently, I can recommend BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA to you, even at
full prices.

Title
Review for Edward II (1991)
     EDWARD II is a film by Derek Jarman, written by Jarman, Stephen
McBride, and Ken Butler, based on the play by Christopher Marlowe.  It
stars Steven Waddington, Kevin Collins, Andrew Tiernan, Jody G. Raber,
Jerome Flynn, Tilda Swinton, and Nigel Terry.  Art direction by
Christopher Hobbs.  The film is rated R for violence and sexual
situations.
     EDWARD II is Jarman's ninth feature film and it's a stunner.  You
will either love it or hate it.  There is no middle ground here.
Jarman, the director of SEBASTIANE, CARAVAGGIO, JUBILEE, and THE
TEMPEST, is in no mood to shilly-shally here and has produced an angry,
provocative film, a polemic against homophobia, agit-prop, radical
propaganda.  I think it is very good theater; I don't think that it's
perfect film-making, however much I applaud its politics.
     The only problem I have is that EDWARD II looks like a filmed stage
play, not like a movie, except for the fast-paced editing.  The
minimalist sets, designed by Christopher Hobbs, consist of slablike
blocks and walls; there are no exteriors at all.  This is a response to
Jarman's shoestring budget, but it must always be a fault in film.
This is not to say the sets are ineffective; they communicate the
primitive world of Plantagenet England (Edward II ruled from 1307-1327),
the even more primitive world of power politics and bloody hatreds that
are not, unfortunately, so bound by time.  The costumes are mostly
contemporary.  Edward and his lover Piers Gaveston appear in dark,
stylish suits and ties, the Queen Isabella (Tilda Swinton) stalks
through the entire movie as a fashion parade of campy haute couture
fashion, the rebellious Mortimer (Nigel Terry) wears the uniform of a
British officer, right down the bristly little mustache.
     Jarman never stops reminding us that this is not just a costume
flick, that this is about now, that it is happening now.  The most
blatant exercise of this insistence is the battle scene that becomes a
confrontation between OutRage activists with very contemporary placards
and riot police with truncheons and plastic shields.  (The extras were
real-life members of OutRage, a British group somewhat akin to ACT-Up in
the U.S.)
     The language, however, is purely Marlowe's, although Jarman and his
co-writers use only a third of the 1592 play.  The writers have several
characters repeat the question "How can you love what the rest of the
world hates?" (remembered approximately).  How indeed?  Is this the
crux?  The antique blank verse and modern costumes fuse powerfully at
this moment to open the play and the film to the largest possible scope
of meaning.
     Jarman also does something very interesting with the ending, which
he rewrites for Marlowe.  It can be justified from contemporary
documents, I am told, and it certainly can be justified from the
political demands of the movie.  Marlowe's ending is foreshadowed
throughout the action and is enacted in all its brutality and then
thrown away as a bad dream.  Instead, we have a symbol of what happens
when the oppressed help each other, instead of the oppressors, as moving
in its own way as the ending to the novel THE GRAPES OF WRATH.
     As for the performances, let me say first off that I deeply
appreciate the care and precision with which the British actors spoke
Marlowe's words.  I understood every one of them, not something one can
usually say, especially with U.S. productions of Elizabethan drama.
The lovers, Waddington as Edward and Tiernan as Gaveston, were
energetic, impudent, imprudent, and very passionate, without chewing any
scenery.  However, Swinton as the Queen steals the entire movie.  She
took Best Actress at Venice and deservedly.  She has the carriage of a
runway fashion model, slinking, slouching, projecting her bony shoulders
like leathern wings.  She is passionate, too, and much more dangerous
than any of the males; she doesn't quite eat her mate, but she comes as
close as possible, familially speaking.
     When Gaveston and Edward part, we head Annie Lennox's version of
Cole Porter's "Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye" from the AIDS fund-raiser
album, "Red, Hot & Blue."  Lennox then appears and gives us a new
interpretation of this beautiful song, bringing out its quiet sadness.
(Jarman came out in 1987 when he announced he was HIV+.  Since then the
British press, in particular, has mounted a death watch on each of his 
films, WAR WORKS, THE GARDEN, and now EDWARD II; Jarman, by all reports,
continues to be creative and productive, despite a series of
opportunistic infections last year.)
     I don't have the name of Jarman's cinematographer.  I should
because the film is beautifully shot, relying on carefully arranged
tableaux vivants and chiaroscuro lighting, as it does in the main, the
effects are stagey but visually rich.
     I kept thinking of Peter Greenaway throughout this film, that
despite the contrast of Jarman's stripped down sparseness and
modern-dress plainness the two had much in common in their painterly
sensibilities and their determination to shock and challenge us, the
success with which they entertain us at the same time with the passion
and purity of their anger.
     There is male nudity, homoeroticism, brutality and violence in this
film.  Be forewarned, this may not be your cup of tea.  But for those
whose cup it is, or who are willing to take a bit of a flutter, EDWARD
II will reward them handsomely.  It is not going to be easy to find;
even in Seattle, it is only playing at the Broadway Market in the heart
of the gay ghetto of Capital Hill.  Pay whatever you must; it's worth
it.

Title
Review for Kindergarten Cop (1990)
     I enjoyed this more than I was expecting to.  In fact, one of my
motivations for going at all was that I'd seen almost everything else
that I intend to see, except for some imports in Seattle's University
District, which would have inconvenient to get to tonight (New Year's
Eve), as well as foolhardy.
     Another reason to see it for me was the fact that it had been shot
in Astoria, Oregon, and near Cannon Beach, Ecola State Park, in fact.
These are areas where I spend a lot of my time and I wanted to see some
familiar landmarks on the big screen.
     I was expecting a cross between a brat movie and Clint Eastwood.
What I got was a screen full of really adorable little kids, three
pretty nice performances by women, a pretty good villain, and Arnold
Schwarzenegger mugging and straining and being fairly funny and
appealing himself.
     One of the treasures of KINDERGARTEN COP is the presence of Linda
Hunt.  She's like tonight's blue moon, she drives me crazy with
admiration and her presence is way too rare.  Of course, she won an
Oscar for her male-drag performance in THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY,
since then I've seen her in SILVERADO, which I loved and apparently no
one bought tickets for, and THE BOSTONIANS, a sort of "Masterpiece
Theater" piece for the silver screen, and maybe something else, but it
ain't much.  In KINDERGARTEN COP, she's almost pretty (I've always
thought of her as beautiful, but never pretty) as the principal of
Astoria Elementary.  I need hardly say she's mostly wasted here, but I
appreciate the gesture.
     Another unlooked-for casting treat was Carroll Baker, who was
making a run at sex goddess 30 years ago, and now looks much the worse
for the experience, rather like, in fact, that wonderful actress who
played Mrs. Archer in THE MALTESE FALCON (you know and you'll tell me
by e-mail, please).  Baker excels as the wicked mother of the heavy,
whom she out-villains.  He's played by Richard Tyson and he's quite
enjoyable with his almost baby face and his domineering mom.
     Pamela Reed is especially good as Arnie's undercover-cop/partner.
Her manner reminded me of some wonderful wise-cracking comediennes from
the days of screwball, tough and caring, like the recently deceased Eve
Arden.  She does a not-to-be-missed send-up of Arnie's Austrian accent,
BTW.
     Arnie's love interest is played by a mostly uninteresting Penelope
Anne Miller.  There's nothing terribly wrong with her performance, just
nothing terribly right about it.
     Arnie definitely has a flare for comedy, and I don't mean those
silly puns he to cap every action scene with.  His scenes with the
children are actually endearing and he manages to outmug 30 6-year-olds,
which is itself no mean feat.
     I enjoyed seeing the North Coast locales and no one played hob with
the geography in anything resembling the violence done to it by the
cute-robot movie shot in Astoria, BATTERIES NOT INCLUDED.  For example,
the sun does not rise and set west of the Astoria Bridge in this movie.
     My partner, who really pissed and moaned about dragged to
KINDERGARTEN COP, laughed himself silly throughout and completely
enjoyed himself.  You probably will, too.

Title
Review for Panama Deception, The (1992)
     THE PANAMA DECEPTION is a documentary film directed by Barbara
Trent and produced by the Empowerment Project.  Not rated -- contains
violence and graphic images of corpses.
     THE PANAMA DECEPTION like all good documentary films has passion
and a point of view; it does not pretend to be "objective" reportage.
This is an impassioned argument for the idea that the American people
must know that and how they were lied to about the invasion of Panama,
and not just by the Bush administration and the Pentagon, but by the
network news, by the leading newspapers of the country, by the very men
and women whose jobs are supposedly to present us with the a complete
picture of daily events, and not just parrot official propaganda.
     Like the previous documentary, COVERUP: THE IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR,
Barbara Trent marshals her assertions and her facts in the form of
video, TV clips, newspaper and magazine clippings, press briefings,
speeches, and interviews with experts and with eye-witnesses.  There is
never any doubt about Trent's point of view, but she presents it
powerfully and documents it exhaustively.  She briefly covers the
history of Panama from its U.S.-backed secession from Columbia, through
its Canal Zone days, through the Treaty signed by Jimmy Carter and
denounced by Ronald Reagan that renounced U.S. sovereignty in the C.Z.,
and finally through the rise of Manuel Noriega and of George Bush.  It
documents their long association and their final falling out.  It lays
out the long, orchestrated build-up to the invasion as a U.S. strategy
of dirty tricks to be blamed on Noriega but perpetrated by U.S. agents.
Finally, it tells what it can about the invasion and the way it was not
covered directly by the U.S. media.  There are virtually no videotapes
of the first three days of the invasion and precious little other
documentation of it, thanks to the thorough efforts of the
U.S. military to suppress all efforts by reporters, photographers, and
cameramen.
     In interview after interview, the film builds its case for what
really happened in Panama, of the atrocities by U.S. forces, the
summary executions, the random violence, especially in the poor areas,
the rounding up and interrogation of thousands of civilians, many of
whom were on enemies lists prepared by the U.S.-supported Endara
government.  And most shocking of all, it documents its assertion that
between 2500 and 4000 Panamanians died in the invasion, ten or more
times figures put out by the U.S. government at various times.
     Some of us are not too shocked to find another case of the
government lying to us, especially in the area of foreign operations,
but I for one was shocked to be shown how the U.S. television and
newspaper media did nothing to question the official version of events
in Panama, how they fully and complacently cooperated with the
government to mislead us, how they helped make a demon out of our
long-time tool Noriega, how they valued only American lives, American
deaths.
     Of course, the story of the Panamanian invasion continues today.
The country is still in ruins, still waiting for reconstruction money.
Our puppets are still running the government for us; our soldiers are
still randomly patrolling outside our bases, and the Bush administration
is telling what we want to hear: that democracy was restored to country
that had never known democracy, that the drug trade was impeded when in
fact the drug traffic through Panama has doubled or trebled since the
invasion, that the country is on its feet when 20,000 are still homeless
and living in refugee camps we operate.
     The indictments in this film are many and far-reaching.  Its
analysis of the reasons for the invasion are especially disturbing, its
forecasts for future U.S. interventions in the Andean nations, launched
from our bases in Panama haunting.
     (In the Seattle area, THE PANAMA DECEPTION is playing at the Metro
Cinemas in the University District.  The film opened last month in L.A.,
but it was shown as a video.  The Seattle run is of the only film copy
currently.  The Seattle run is intended to finance the production of
more copies.  It is tentatively booked into 20 U.S. cities, if the
Empowerment Project can raise even money to strike enough copies at
$1600 a copy.  Volunteers are passing the hat and encouraging audience
members to get out the word after each showing here.)

Title
Review for Company Business (1991)
     COMPANY BUSINESS is a film directed and written by Nicholas Meyer
and produced by Steven-Charles Jaffe.  It stars Gene Hackman, Mikhail
Baryshnikov, and Kurtwood Smith.  Rated PG-13 for language and some
violence.
     COMPANY BUSINESS describes itself as a "post-cold war thriller."
Half true insofar as it is indeed set in the post-cold war environment,
but it hardly thrills.  It is a pleasant entertainment, nicely
photographed, competently acted, with some touches of satire and humor;
but for one thing events in the real world, such as it is, have so far
outstripped the script as to make it an historical curiosity and not the
terribly au courant statement of this particular brave new world.  For
another, the story is complicated and the complications take too long to
be set up in the beginning.  The story and the characters are also
curiously uninvolving, sans loyalties, sans countries, sans any vision
except getting out.
     It has some individual moments.  The subway sequence, for example,
is as close to thrilling as the movie gets.  The ironic performances of
Hackman and Baryshnikov are charming, if not exactly engrossing.  I
think, by the way, that this might be the first time I've seen Misha in
a film in which he did no dancing at all.  The film's observations of
the difficulties of certain types to adjusting to this new world provide
the most interest and could have developed into a true political satire.
Instead, Meyers retreated to the less risky ground of Spy-Vs-Spy.  Loss
of nerve, I call it.
     Some of you might enjoy this film at matinee prices, but in general
I really cannot recommend it except as a cheap, future rental.

Title
Review for Husbands and Wives (1992)
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES is a film written and directed by Woody Allen.
It stars Allen, Mia Farrow, Judy Davis, Sydney Pollack, Juliette Lewis,
Liam Neeson, and Lysette Anderson.  Cinematography  by Carlo Di Palma.
Rated R for subject matter, language, and scenes of simulated sex.
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES is going to be the most widely seen and
discussed film made to date by Woody Allen.  Despite the aroma of
scandal and lurid headlines that clings to the film, it is not only
possible, but important, to view HUSBANDS AND WIVES as a film, not some
weird and vaguely shocking extension of tabloid scandal-mongering.  You
and I have no real knowledge of the situation in the Allen's and
Farrow's lives, the only thing we can know, the only thing we can judge,
is the impressive achievement this film represents.
     The writing and acting in this film are distinguished, inspired,
and very moving.  The camerawork is problematical.  The writing is
entirely accessible, unlike some of Allen's recent work (SHADOWS AND FOG
springs to mind here) which seemed calculated to appeal to some
specialized readers of "New Yorker" magazine and the smarmier film
students among us.  The writing is about the chilling and disorienting
experience of growing old with someone else, about our dependence on
others, about the importance of compromise in real life.  It is also
creative and inventive, moving us between a "conventional" dramatic
movie and a talking-head documentary (a technique used in elsewhere).
The documentary portions represent some of the best moments in the film,
with the characters speaking into the camera words that always have two
meanings to the audience.  Of course, Allen has always been a leading
purveyor of irony, but here in this film he rises to a new level of both
irony and insight.
     As for the acting, every one of the principals has gotten into the
heart of the meaning of his or her character.  Especially impressive is
Judy Davis, who largely dominates the cast, although Mia Farrow rises to
the occasion with the best work I've ever seen from her.  Sydney
Pollack, the director of OUT OF AFRICA, TOOTSIE, THEY SHOOT HORSES,
DON'T THEY, and others, is comfortable and natural as Davis's estranged
husband; Pollack is an occasional actor, and it will be a pleasure to
see him again.  Juliette Lewis, who was the best thing about POINT FEAR,
is amazing and hilarious as the brilliant writing student in Allen's
class.  They share a scene in the back of a taxi (in which we never see,
only hear, Allen) that is one of the high points of the film.  Allen
himself is quieter, more serious than is often the case.  His own
characterization as Gabe is complex and uncompromising in his
willingness to stand up to the x-ray vision of his own filmmaking.
Finally, I should mention Liam Neeson (THE MISSION), if only because
he's got a sweet accent and an attractive face and figure; fortunately,
he's also a capable actor whose character has a nice hint of the
manipulative doofus you and I suspect all good looking, earnest,
sensitive people to be and who gets instructively out-maneuvered and
out-manipulated by someone even "nicer" than himself, all without ever
catching on.
     (By the way, Allen is still casting cameos, a la SHADOWS AND FOG.
Look especially for Nora Ephron in a very funny party scene.)
     Carlo Di Palma's hand-held camerawork will either drive to you to
distraction or to delight.  Fortunately, the jiggliest, most
disorienting technique is confined to the opening scene, after which the
camera largely settles down.  Slightly upsetting, too, are the jump-cuts
Allen throws in at random; jump-cuts look like a snippet of film is
missing.  The effect is interesting once or twice, but mostly I was not
entirely sure that we were not looking at a damaged print.  If it hadn't
been opening night, I would have entertained the idea even more
seriously.  Some of you will see in these camera and editing techniques
an homage, perhaps, to Cassavetes and Godard; others may bemoan the
abandonment of Allen's former standard of visual elegance.  As I say,
sometimes it works, sometimes it's distracting.  In either case, it is
not the reason why this is one of Woody Allen's greatest movies ever.
     And it is a great movie, brilliant, sparkling, insightful, moving
and touching, thoughtful, challenging, and a whole lot more.  You simply
must go to HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  Pay what you must.  You will be amply
rewarded.  Fortunately, because of events entirely outside this film, it
has opened much more widely than is usual for a Woody Allen.  It will be
very interesting to see if TriStar's calculated and possibly cynical
marketing gamble pays off.
[Note on r.a.m.r. #1526: Due to my error, the movie I referred to as THE
PANAMA CONNECTION should have been referred to as THE PANAMA DECEPTION.
My apologies for the inconvenience.  -Frank Maloney]

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
     SNEAKERS is a film directed by Phil Alden Robinson and written by
Robinson and Lawrence Lasker & Walter Parkes.  It stars Robert Redford,
Ben Kingsley, Mary McDonnell, Sydney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd, River
Phoenix, and David Strathairn.  Rated PG, for minor violence.
     SNEAKERS is an old-fashioned caper movie, despite its overlay of
computers and high-techery.  It is funny, likable, and very smooth.  It
is also, in all likelihood, nonsense and pointless at the end.  It has a
taut story and some wonderful actors who seem to be enjoying themselves.
Director Phil Alden Robinson (FIELD OF DREAMS) along with Walter Parkes
and Lawrence Lasker (WAR GAMES) put together a smooth, workable package
with only a few deficiencies.  It is perhaps a little too smooth to the
point where the tension level is not high enough to call it a thriller,
where the paranoia level is confined mostly to the very funny and very
wigged out character played by Dan Aykroyd, and where politics is
reduced a single evil genius (Ben Kingsley).  The ostensible topic is
cryptography, but the real subject is star vehicle.  Also, it would have
been nice if they had figured something for River Phoenix to do.
     Indeed, Robert Redford turns in his best performance in years.
After such bombs as HAVANA, his on-screen career could the kind of boost
SNEAKERS is probably capable of giving it.  Redford is not the smooth
man-of-the-world, but a member of the over-the-hill gang, who stumbles,
who bumbles.  In its way, it is a courageous performance.
     And it is a genuine pleasure to find Sidney Poitier on the screen
again.  I find him much more interesting and less on his dignity here
than he's been since the end of the 50s.  He is the sure anchor for the
rest of the cast.
     Mary McDonnell continues to impress me; I loved her as Kevin
Kline's wife in the Lawrence Kasdan film of last year, and my enthusiasm
then is more than justified by her performance now; the sexual tension
between her and Redford's characters is very erotic without any overt
bedroom hijinks.
     As mentioned, Aykroyd does a near perfect turn on his character, a
man who calmly believes the CIA is holding John Kennedy prisoner, inter
alia.  
     Kingsley's performance is more problematical.  Usually, it's the
heavy who has the most fun in these movies; Kingsley's performance is
more complex than mere scene-chewing, yet somehow it does not quite
satisfy, which may more the writing than the acting.  Does Redford's
Martin Bishop really have to tell Kingsley's character that he's crazy;
shouldn't that been made clear by the character himself?
     The editing is intelligent and add much to all forms of tension in
the film.  The cast is first rate.  The production values are high
overall.  There are lots of well-earned laughs.  I just can't believe
the story any more than I could believe the story of WAR GAMES.  An
plausible movie about the inherent threats to human liberty in the
Information Age would be an important film.  SNEAKERS is merely good
entertainment.  SNEAKERS is an entertaining film, not one to be taken
too seriously, but certainly worth a matinee ticket.

Title
Review for Death in Brunswick (1991)
     DEATH IN BRUNSWICK is an Australian film directed by John Ruane,
from a script by Ruane and Boyd Oxlade and adapted from a novel by
Oxlade.  It stars Sam Neill, Zoe Carides, Boric Brkic, John Clarke, and
Yvonne Lawley.  No rating, includes violence, nudity, graphic
grave-digging scene.
     DEATH IN BRUNSWICK is delightfully outrageous black comedy that was
big box-office success in Australia and was nominated for a 1991
Australian Film Award.  It played at the last Seattle International Film
Festival where the reception was positive enough to encourage the film's
North American distribution.  This is its U.S. premiere in Seattle at
the Metro Cinemas.
     Brunswick is an ethnically-mixed, low-income suburb of Melbourne.
It is the home to a middle-aged loser, Carl, whose has been
psychologically mauled by his mum, nice, old Mrs.  Fitzgerald, played
menacingly by Yvonne Lawley (AMONG THE CINDERS).  Carl is played by the
chameleonic Sam Neill, who has held his own against such major scene
stealers as Meryl Streep (CRY IN THE DARK) and Judy Davis (MY BRILLIANT
CAREER).  Neill is a master of timing and lifts the semiautobiographical
story from the distasteful to a level of offbeat energy that redeems and
illustrates its anarchic view of the world-as-loony-bin.  Carl gets a
job cooking at local dance club owned by a man who thinks his patrons
deserved maggoty meat and cockroach-infested greengroceries.  Carl
immediately falls in love with a young bartender ("We all thought you
were a pouf"), Sophie, played by Zoe Carides, and runs afoul of the
cretinous, bullying bouncer.  Carl's kitchen helper, Mustafa, played by
Nico Lathouris, is more interested in dealing drugs and fencing boom
boxes out the alley door than he is in scrubbing down the counters, but
otherwise he's a mousy family man whose fate is more than the product of
dumb luck than deserts.
     In between ghoulish moments, Carl's life is lifted and then
imperiled by his attraction to Sophie.  They have a funny movie date at
the Progress Cinema where the moppets around them are watching THE
MARSUPIALS: HOWLING III when they're not jeering Sophie and Carl trying
to make out.  On the other hand, Mum is picking at him ("I know you
think this is bohemian") mercilessly.  Carl's mate, a gravedigger
played by John Clarke, and Clarke have to deal with one of Carl's
problems, but the generally drift of Carl's life by now is becoming
rapidly more self-destructive than anyone else can stand.  The final
resolution of Carl's troubles to me means that he finally joined the
nutsiness around him, that he finally gave up his quiet, desperate
clinging to sanity and normality; in an insane world, only the sane are
crazy.
     This movie really tests the limits of good taste, but the
first-time director, John Ruane, is too talented to let his movie slide
over the edge.  Ellery Ryan's cinematography is gritty and apt; the
soundtrack sets an engaging mood from the beginning.  It hard to like
Carl, although he does redeem himself in a characteristically funky way.
And the film does have a tendency to become a procession of increasingly
outlandish incidents in the manner of AFTER HOURS and INTO THE NIGHT.
But Ruane's wry humor and Carl's desperate unquenchability pull the film
out of what could have been a tailspin.
     I recommend DEATH IN BRUNSWICK to you if you get a chance to see
it.  Try to hold out for matinee prices; this film is too far from the
mainstream to really justify mainstream prices.

Title
Review for Death Becomes Her (1992)
     DEATH BECOMES HER is a movie directed by Robert Zemeckis, from a
script by Martin Donovan and David Koepp.  It stars Meryl Streep, Goldie
Hawn, Bruce Willis, and Isabella Rosellini.  Rated PG-13 for violence
and nudity.
     DEATH BECOMES HER is an occult black comedy, neither qualifier
being an easy one to bring off successfully.  LOVE AT FIRST BITE and
YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN did this neatly, but a hundred other efforts have
failed to find that perfect mixture of camp, horror, and conscientious
scenery-chewing.  DEATH almost succeeds in its aspirations, never quite
going over the top, but it works as entertainment; it is bold,
inventive, chance-taking, and a lot of fun.
     Of course, no small amount of the fun arises from the amazing,
seamless special effects.  This is Hollywood's most expensive film in
this genre and the money was well spent.  The folks at Lucasfilms'
Industrial Light and Magic Company employed a rich vocabulary of
computer-generated, live-action effects of the sort we would normally
expect to be possible only in animated cartoons.
     Robert Zemeckis (WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT, ROMANCING THE STONE)
found the right cartoon visual style and comedy tone to highlight both
his f/x and his stars, and to carry us over the rough spots in the
script by Martin Donovan and David Koepp.  The script is the weakest
element of the movie; it has an important satiric point to make about
aging in a society that prizes youth and is rapidly aging itself.
Unfortunately, the script never finds a way to give this point the
necessary power and force.  The set up is a long time developing and
exposes some holes in the plot.  Some of the scenes are strictly of the
slow-boat-to-China variety, some are open to charges of prejudice
against women, against the overweight, and so forth.  All of which
distracts from the point of the film: the price to be paid for immortal
youth.
     The cast, like the special effects and the direction, help
overcome, or at least obscure, the script problems.  Meryl Streep is
nothing short of brilliant as the aging, frightened star, the insecure
grande dame.  The first time we see her is in the funniest parody of the
Broadway musical since Robert Preston gasped and panted his way in drag
through the finale of VICTOR/VICTORIA, and possibly since the
"Springtime for Hitler" sequence in THE PRODUCERS.  She trots out a rich
store of expressions, gestures, and slapstick schtick.  In our
household, her line "*Now* a warning!" has become a by-word, a running
joke, but we still can't do it as well as La Streep.  Goldie Hawn
handles her triple-part effectively.  But it is Bruce Willis who is the
greatest surprise and therefore the greatest pleasure, in its way; he is
the broken wimp caught between two self-obsessed, manipulating viragos;
he is our, the audience's, spokesman and as such becomes the moral
center and the hero, the point of light in the blackness.
     I found DEATH BECOMES HER an pleasant way to spend a couple of
hours and can recommend it to you for its virtues.  For its failings, I
recommend you pay matinee prices.

Title
Review for Hoffa (1992)
     HOFFA is a film directed by Danny DeVito, from a script by David
Mamet.  It stars Jack Nicholson, DeVito, Armand Assante.  Rated R for
violence.
     HOFFA is quite simply an amazing achievement.  It marks the
emergence of Danny DeVito as a director of the first rank.  It also
marks the reemergence of Jack Nicholson as a major actor, instead of
merely a major ham.  However, HOFFA is a tricky film to take in insofar
as DeVito and David Mamet, the writer, take no moral positions vis-a-vis
Jimmy Hoffa.  They provide us with a few texts to guide us, especially
when Hoffa tells a reporter, "You have to weigh what is lost and what is
gained."  Hoffa was the brilliant leader of the Teamsters Union who also
enmeshed his union with organized crime.  I should say that I am not
neutral myself on this subject, even if I am of two minds.  My father
was an associate of Hoffa and Dave Beck, his predecessor as president of
the Teamsters.  I actually met Hoffa when I was a child.  My father was
subpoenaed to appear before the McClellan Senate Labor Rackets Committee
and earned the undying enmity of Bobby Kennedy.  I am not neutral, be
warned.
     The story is a series of flashbacks, memories as Hoffa and his
longtime (and composite) sidekick (DeVito) wait for a rendezvous with
his secret Mafia partner.  We see how they met in the days when a driver
would be fired and blackballed for being pro-union; we witness an
exciting, bloody, brilliantly directed, horrible battle between
Teamsters and management goons.  We see the secret deal with the mob
that established the union's ascendency.  We see Hoffa's long and very
personal feud with Bobby Kennedy.  All of these scenes and the others
are filtered through the sidekick's eyes and loyalties.  The structure
ensures that DeVito gets at least as much screen time as Nicholson.  But
it also makes it possible to make a film that need not pretend
neutrality or to make judgments.  What we do see through DeVito's eyes
is a complex, tragically flawed, remote and enigmatic leader of
brilliance and a radical devotion to his cause.
     As Hoffa, Jack Nicholson is brilliant, perfect, inspiring.  He
becomes Hoffa.  Nicholson recedes until he is lost entirely.  It is the
performance of a lifetime.  He fully captures the drive and devils that
propelled Hoffa.  It is a performance of nuance and self-effacement.
And it is exciting to watch.
     DeVito does his usual job of being DeVito in his role as the
sidekick, venal, amoral, shy only the dirty laugh of most of his parts.
It's acceptable and it in no way competes with Nicholson.  
     However, as director, DeVito is a brilliant chance-taker and
problem-solver, producing a far less conventional biopic than
"non-Hollywood" Spike Lee's MALCOM X.  We have no childhood prologue, no
family life.  All we have is what the sidekick knows and sees of his
idol.  DeVito employs successfully split screens, creative transitional
devices, and other unconventional story-telling techniques.
     This, I should warn the squeamish, is a rough film: violence,
blood.  The f-word is just about the first one you hear.  There is
worse, too.
     I recommend HOFFA to the rest of you in the strongest of terms.
This is a masterpiece.

Title
Review for ÄAy, Carmela! (1990)
     AY, CARMELA! is a film by Carlos Saura and stars Spain's first
international box-office star Carmen Maura.  Maura was last seen in
Pedro Almodovar's WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A  NERVOUS BREAKDOWN, which was
my choice for the best film of  1989 (the year I saw it--it was released
in Spain 1987, I think).
     AY,CARMELA is set in Spain in 1938 during the Civil War, that
bloody dress rehearsal for World War II.  Carmela and Paulino, the
Tip-Top Variety, have been entertaining front-line Republican troops.
Carmela convinces Paulino to bug out for the safety of Valencia only to
land them in the clutches of the Falangist and Italian forces.  They are
recruited from a possible firing squad to do a show for the Fascist
officers and for a group of Polish volunteers captured from the
International Brigade and condemned to die in the morning.  Normally I
don't mention much if anything about plots in my reviews, but I know
that many of you will not get a chance to see this movie unless you find
it on video next year and I want you to see it.  This is a wonderfully
resonant movie with a wonderful performance by Carmen Maura (who can do
no wrong, as far as I'm concerned).
     The theme of this movie is the corruption of the artist by
totalitarianism and by extension the corruption of us all by forces
beyond our control.  Do we cooperate with evil or do we resist even if
it is hopeless?  Carmela resists, Paulino cooperates.  The results of
these choices both uplift and terribly sadden us.  I was crying as I
exited the auditorium.  Fair warning.  The film scholar might like to
compare AY, CARMELA! with Istvan Szabo's MEPHISTO (1981).  They are the
low and the high roads that lead to the same destination.
     For me it is enough merely to kick back and let Maura do her thing.
She is the nurturing mother, with her long, wise, Castillian face,
impossible, impractical in the face of evil, an unintentionally campy
vaudevillean, the heroine, the buffoon.  Maura captures this silly,
brave, ignoble, noble woman fully and perfectly; she hates being a
heroine, but she hates being a dupe even more.
     Backing Maura up is a fine actor Andres Pajares as Paulino.
Paulino is a man, vain, pliable, a survivor first, full of himself.
Pajares creates a slippery coward and we can see why Carmela loves him
even though she sees him as honestly as she sees everything else around
her.  And the two of them on stage leave no doubt as to why vaudeville
died.
     I also enjoyed the performance of Maurizio di Razza as the preening
Italian lieutenant who is the director/producer of the Fascists' show;
he especially delights us and illuminates the film when he leads a
military chorus of an amazingly racist song about turning the Ethiopians
(then under the Italians' colonial heel) into good Italians; I haven't
seen anything like it since the "Springtime for Hitler" sequence in Mel
Brooks' THE PRODUCERS, except I presume that this song is historically
true.
     And then there is Gabino Diego as the shell-shocked mute who
attaches himself to the Tip-Top Variety after they find him naked on th
road and starving.  Diego's performance draws into its unfunny comedy
the entire horror of Guernica and all wars.
     (The script is by Rafael Azcona.  AY, CARMELA! won 13 Goya Prizes
(the Spanish Oscar), including film, director, actress, actor,
supporting actor, adapted screenplay.  Saura was the director of CRIA,
CARMEN, and BLOOD WEDDING.)
     Viewing this film on the heels of the cease fire in the Persian
Gulf has strange and powerful resonances for me and a kind of special
relevance.  But its story and its message would be powerful and relevant
in any circumstance.  I completely and enthusiastically recommend AY,
CARMELA! to you.

Title
Review for Avalon (1990)
     AVALON is the third in Barry Levinson's Baltimore trilogy, which
began with DINER and continued with TIN MEN.  What links the three
movies is setting (Baltimore), time (late 40's to early 60's), and
feeling (love, compassion, sadness, nostalgia, &c).
     They are very personal films and in some ways AVALON is the most
personal of them all.  The title is the name of a street in the
row-house neighborhoods of working-class Baltimore.  And a ball room.
(And maybe all that Arthurian stuff lurking in the background.  Now I
once lived on Santa Catalina Island and Avalon brings up memories of a
slightly different for me, but that's my movie, ain't it?)
     AVALON is one those multigenerational movies that jumps a lot of
decades, jumbles up a lot of characters, and is often a disorganized
mess.  Fortunately, in this case, Levinson uses several devices to hold
the movie together, even though it is still too long and unfocused.  One
device is the narrative focus, which is primarily the character of Sam
Kripinsky, who "came to America in 1914."  It was the most beautiful
place" he had ever seen (to quote Sam's oft-repeated story.  Sam goes
from a young man in the prime of his youth all the way through a
semi-senile oldster waiting to die.  Sam is played by Armin
Stahl-Mueller and brilliantly; his wife is wonderful and hilarious Joan
Plowright, who was the major delight in another movie this year as the
mother-in-law of the philanderer whom everyone is out to kill (can't
dredge it up, sorry!).
     Another device for unity is the return through the decades to those
most American of holidays, the Fourth of July and Thanksgiving.  The
changing face of America is clearest is the changing faces of these
holidays.  And it's pretty sad, I must say.
     The third device is TV.  Once the first TV set is turned on, there
is a set in every room, it seems, these play out their lives in.
     This is a sweet, powerful movie about who we Americans are and how
we got this fucked up.

Title
Review for Only the Lonely (1991)
     ONLY THE LONELY is a film from John Hughes (co-producer) and Chris
Columbus (co-director).  The film stars John Candy, Maureen O'Hara, Ally
Sheedy, with Anthony Quinn and James Belushi.
     I recently asked in this newsgroup "Does anybody *like* John
Candy?" by which I meant does anyone find him a sympathetic screen
presence.  Some people enjoy laughing at him, some cannot abide him; but
I doubted that anyone wanted him as a personal friend.  Generally, I do
not enjoy Candy's good-hearted jerk; the last film in which I thought he
was even moderately successful was PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES with
Steve Martin; the scene when the two men wake up in bed together and
have to reestablish their heterosexual manliness is both funny and
telling.
     ONLY THE LONELY offered no such insights into men or women, or even
moms.  Mom may be a bitch, but only because she loves us.  End of
insight.  And certainly none of comic manicness of THROW MOMMA FROM THE
TRAIN.
     I went to ONLY THE LONELY to see Maureen O'Hara and anticipated a
certain amount of discomfort in the presence of Candy as the price to be
paid.  As it turned out, it was neither as bad as it might have been,
nor as good as it could have been.  Even O'Hara, fiery and vicious,
suffers from a script that gives her precious little motivation and
less history.  She's a bigot, an emasculator; but you know she's
basically ok underneath.  In the Hughes-Columbus world, everyone is
basically ok underneath, even Mom.  Still, O'Hara shines through the
limitations of the script; she's alive when the rest of the movie is
dozing.
     Candy tones down the Uncle Buck klutziness and becomes the
pushover.  He decides to assert himself against the wishes of the whole
world, but exactly why will remain a mystery, as will the related
questions of why now and not before.  Candy's acting skills are
sufficiently limited that if he's not doing some SCTV fat-jerk shtick
he's talking real slow and looking like a whipped puppy to register
sensitivity.  The result here is some glacial pacing and slippery
schmaltz.
     Ally Sheedy was supposed to be this major-league introvert, afraid
of the sound of her own voice.  Not only do we not know why, but we are
given no particular reason why she finds herself attracted to Candy or
increasingly able to assert herself.  At least she's a better actor than
Candy and seems to be maturing into someone that may prove to
interesting to watch on the screen.
     In supporting roles we have James Belushi, totally wasted as
Candy's meat-wagon partner.  God, I wish the script had done more one
joke on the subject of the meat wagon.  Or a subplot hinted at of
Belushi's relationship with rather alarming wife.  And then there is
Anthony Quinn, old, totally charming, quite sexy and seductive as he
pursues the unobtainable  O'Hara, who hates all Greeks (of course, Quinn
plays a Greek).  
     A friend of mine with a taste for sentimental movies loved this
one.  I did not totally hate ONLY THE LONELY.  Instead, I would
recommend that this might be a tolerable film to rent in video, but
don't pay even matinee prices for it.  There's not enough there there.

Title
Review for Object of Beauty, The (1991)
     THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY is a film written and directed by Michael
Lindsay-Hogg, starring John Malkovich and Andie MacDowell, with Joss
Ackland, Peter Reigert, Lolita Davidovich, and Rudi Davies.
      THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY brings together two actors from two of my
favorite 1989 films -- Malkovich in DANGEROUS LIAISONS, Andie MacDowell
in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE -- in a story that seems to have been
written to showcase their delicate, aristocratic mannerisms.  If theirs
had been the only story, it would at best have resulted in a shallow
comedy of manners: two spoiled, jet-setters living off the last of their
used-up credit, united in their mutual mistrust, their mutual fear of
being broke and having to give up luxurious London hotels and the rest.
She owns a 9-inch Henry Moore sculpture worth $40,000; she won't sell
it, but she might fake its theft and take the insurance money.  But when
it turns up missing, they both think the other took it.
      What saves the characters and the movie is the radiant presence of
the hearing-impaired hotel maid played by Rudi Davies.  Her life of
poverty parallels Jake and Tina in their brocaded suite -- her struggle
to find a place for herself, her punk younger brother who wants to take
care of them someday (just as Tina is waiting for Jake to take care of
her), and the power of the Henry Moore over her life.  Davies doesn't
speak, she glows brighter than her red hair with a beauty than MacDowell
may someday achieve if she's lucky.  The same sad beauty of the Henry
Moore, the beauty of experience, of having lived, of having perceived
something behind the quotidian.
      Not that I don't admire Andie MacDowell greatly for her sly skills
as a deft, subtle comedienne.  I don't think she's quite as good here as
she was in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE, but it's close, a talking point,
certainly.
      Malkovich's Jake reminds me of Jeremy Irons in REVERSAL OF
FORTUNE, if only less fascinating and more human.  He's funny,
despicable, and sympathetic, especially when he drops his upper-crust
moue long enough to give us a glimpse of the frightened man behind it.
      Of the other players, I give much praise to Joss Ackland, the
duplicitous hotel manager whose oleaginous will is to avoid scenes and
run his hotel "on a seamless cloud of perfection" whatever compromises
and dirty deals are required.  Peter Reigert is Tina's soon-to-be-ex,
the man who started it all by giving Tina the Henry Moore.  The little
bust is itself a kind of character, too, as it passes through many
hands, inspiring a range of emotions and serenely being itself in a
variety of environments.
     The only casting problem was that the script really had too little
for the wonderful Lolita Davidovitch to do.  Still it's always good to
see her on screen.
     Over all, THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY is a well-crafted, subtle comedy
about growth that makes humans out of us all.  Highly recommended --
even at full prices.

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is a film directed by Michael Mann, from a
script by Mann and Christopher Crowe.  It stars Daniel Day-Lewis,
Madeleine Stowe, West Studi, Russell Means, Eric Schwieg, Jodhi May,
Maurice Roeves, and Steven Waddington.  Rated R for graphic violence.
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS has proved to be popular story ever since
James Fenimore Cooper published the original novel in 1826, part of his
series "The Leatherstocking Tales."  It has been adapted as a movie at
least three times: 1920 version by Maurice Tourneur, one of the great
silent movies; the 1936 version with Randolph Scott; the 1977 version
for TV with Steve Forrest.  In addition, there is the loose adaptation,
THE LAST OF THE REDMEN, 1947, from Columbia.  There was also a serial
made in 1932 in twelve chapters of thirteen minutes each and a TV series
that I never watched.  It is my personal opinion that Cooper's novel is
unreadable today and mercifully it's been a couple of generations since
school children were required to slog through its overwrought prose and
romantic generalizations.
     This is retelling of the story of the white man adopted adopted by
age 2 or 3 by the Mohican Chingachgook and raised with his
foster-brother Uncas (the name of a prominent Mohican leader of the
previous century, by the way).  His involvement with a local but bloody
skirmish in the French and Indian War, an 1757 siege of a British
fortress, and his involvement with the commander's elder daughter has a
lot of bodice-ripper potential, and the Michael Mann and Christopher
Crowe script gives the otherwise masterful Hawkeye, aka Nathaniel, some
pretty turgid lines.  The only really important fault of the entire
movie, indeed, is its inability to develop Hawkeye beyond a macho
stereotype, the invincible, completely manly, mostly laconic man of
action, who values life and independence above all else.  This script is
based not on the novel, it seems, but rather on Philip Dunne's script
for the 1936 version.  Aside from the problems surrounding fleshing out
of Nathaniel's character, this newest script improves hugely on Cooper's
romanticized, simplistic paean to the noble savage.  The result is
impressive historical detail, exciting action sequences, and just enough
romance to fill in the slow parts.
     Much of the power of the film comes through its design and
photography.  The designer Wolf Krueger provides us with awesome
authenticity, while the cinematography of Dante Spinotti (and Kubrick
veteran Doug Milsome who was replaced half through production) exploit
the beauty of the North Carolina mountains and forests, as well giving
us a vivid impression of the horrors of 18th Century warfare in the
wilderness.
     Despite a lack of emotional impact, Daniel Day-Lewis, the
chameleonic star of MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF
BEING, and MY LEFT FOOT, enlightens his undeveloped part with ample
charisma and intensity that includes his physical preparation for the
role, which by all reports was detailed and technical -- learning to
reloading a musket on the run, to trap and skin, etc.
     As Hawkeye's love interest, Cora Munro is done great justice by
Madeleine Stowe (UNLAWFUL ENTRY).  Stowe infuses her role with a
spiritual and sexual strength as well as with great intelligence that
makes Cora the perfect mate for the free-living Hawkeye.
     These are supported by very accomplished cast.  Jodhi May plays
Cora's sister sliding into total collapse under the presure of the war
and its horrific aftermath.  Maurice Roeves is the girls' father, the
commanding officer of Fort William Henry; he is brave, but plays too
much by a book written for another continent.  Steven Waddington plays
the corrupted officer who is wooing Cora.  Russell Means (the American
Indian activist, whose presence lends the movie credence more or less by
default) plays Chingachgook and Eric Schweig Uncas; these are strong but
silent Mohicans, but the two actors project exactly the right strength,
love and mutual support to make them human beings.
     But most impressive of the supporting players is Wes Studi, the
Cherokee actor who plays the villain Magua.  Studi comes very close to
stealing the movie from some powerful star power through his near
perfect personification of evil, yet even his twistedness has one moment
of near tenderness; Magua's evil is not entirely without cause or
reason, making it all the more compelling.
     This version of MOHICANS departs widely from the original Cooper
novel, in which there is no romance between Hawkeye and Cora, and in
which Hawkeye is a good deal more cantakerous and rough-edged.  He
becomes a dreamy male sex symbol, which is fine with me, at least.
Michael Mann has remade MOHICANS into a lush, lavish production of
quickly moving scenes of natural beauty (I was particularly taken with
the "key-hole" bridge shot), exciting, bloody hand-to-hand battles,
thrilling spectacle (especially the night bombardment of Fort William
Henry), breathless, heart-bounding wilderness chases, treachery and
self-sacrifice, and just enough romance.

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 is a film directed by Richard Donner, written by
Jeffrey Boam.  It stars Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Rene Russo, Joe Pesci,
and Stuart Wilson.  Rated R, for violence and profanity.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 is the latest installment in the highly profitable
series that teams Mel Gibson and Danny Glover as cops, buddies, and a
union of opposites.  The formula has been milked again in a cynical,
mechanistic, and pointless way that is at the same time the very epitome
of the art of the Hollywood movie.  The highest levels of
professionalism here are thrown away again and again in the pursuit of a
mindless entertainment.  It succeeds in doing exactly what it sets out
to do; millions will flock to see it and walk out satisfied and replete.
It is my unhappy fate to be no longer able to be cajoled by this
particular machine.  I have enjoyed the earlier installments, although
the second less so than the original; I wanted to enjoy this one, but
for the most part I found myself uninvolved and distantly removed from
the fast-paced action, the mayhem, the ludicrous story, the male
bonding, certainly from the low-level homophobic jokes, from the love
stories (man meets dog, man meets sergeant), the multiple and
violent--but poetically justifiable--deaths, the tightly edited fights
and shoot-outs.  It was all so perfunctory, so antiseptic, so unhuman.
     Of course, one has to admire the many skills so willingly exercised
in pursuit of ticket sales; these are men and women who know exactly
what they want and how to get it.  They are whores, but they are
handsomely paid whores.
     For one example, take the presence of Joe Pesci in this movie.
Pesci's here because he was the best thing about LETHAL WEAPON 2.  He
has nothing to do with the story; in fact, the script expends what
little cleverness it possesses in finding ways to get Pesci out of the
way.  His is not a character, it's a marketing ploy (as Jeff Shannon
remarked in the Seattle Times).  He's about as functional as the opening
scene's exploding (imploding?) building; we've been seeing that in
trailers for months, it links to the exploding toilet opener in the
earlier installment; it makes no sense and has nothing to do with
anything that follows, but as a marketing device it is so successful
that it is reprised after the credits with another one.
     For another example, the stars cannot help but impress with their
talent.  Mel Gibson as Riggs is as sexy and funny as ever he was.  He
knows how to have fun and how to share the fun with us, whether that fun
is kidding Murtaugh his partner, risking his life in another grandstand
play, or seducing a guard dog or another (female) cop.  He does lose me,
a little, when he stops having his fun and tries to be honest, tender,
and caring; he has a scene with Murtaugh that is faintly embarrassing
for its paint-by-numbers approach to emotional honesty, as well as its
bottled-in-bond approach to men loving men.
     Gibson has a scene with Rene Russo in which these two, who begin as
adversaries-by-default--one of the hoarier cliches in cop movies--are
one-upping each other in the display of battle scars.  Never mind that
this scene was played out with more stripping and less sex in MOUNTAINS
OF THE MOON between Patrick Bergin as Sir Richard Burton and Bernard
Hill as Dr. Livingstone.  It is funny and sexy here, and fans of
underwear ads get a good peep at Gibson.  Russo is, in fact, the
freshest, most interesting element in this movie.  She's tough and
brutal; naturally, Riggs is going to be attracted to her.  They have a
pretty good scene in a men's room, too.  If there's a LETHAL WEAPON 4
(and who is so bold as to rule that out?), I look to Russo to get more
air time, to be finessed into a new partnership with Riggs.
     Mel's scene with the killer dog is almost as funny a seduction, by
the way, as his scene with Russo.  If not quite as believable.
     Danny Glover as Murtaugh presents a problem to a disgruntled
reviewer.  Glover has presence, there's no mistaking it.  He lends
dignity and weight to even the fluffiest role merely by taking it.
Murtaugh is not a challenging characterization for Danny Glover, but he
manages to make the character more impressive than he ought to be.  The
role is as mechanical as Gibson's.  The bonding scene is just as phony
from Murtaugh's side.  But Glover can kid us into accepting fluff for
substance and that is a major skill.  He pushes buttons, Murtaugh's and
ours.
     The entire movie is a matter of very sharp people pushing buttons.
I keep thinking of the scene in THE PLAYER about getting rid of the
writers.  Just plug in the formulas.  It's all the same, ain't it?  The
point is selling tickets, right?  LETHAL WEAPON 3 is a monster of
efficiency; most of the people who see it will love it; ticket sales
will exceed the GNPs of many third-world countries; everyone is happy.
Forget that everyone in the movie is prostituting him or herself.
Forget that everyone in the audience is the john.  The pace is
everything; keep up the pace and we will never have to think about any
of this.
     I am really sorry to go on like this.  But it is so disheartening
to see the waste, the cynicism of turning intelligence and talent into
machinery.  And for those of you who will write "Get a life.  This is
just a movie."  You are right, of course.  I should just plug myself
into my slot and surrender to the wonder of it all.  I regret that I
cannot do that any more.
     If you're of a mind to, you will enjoy LETHAL WEAPON 3.  As Euell
Gibbons used to say when he prostituted himself for a cereal commercial:
"Many parts are edible."  I won't recommend it, however; I won't need
to.  Some of you will not be able to stay away, and why should you?

Title
Review for Closet Land (1991)
     CLOSET LAND is a movie written and directed by Radha Bharadwaj.
The cast consists in its entirety of Madeleine Stowe and Alan Rickman.
Yes, a two-actor movie.  No one else appears on the screen through the 
entire running time.
     The movie has attracted some talented and well-known people to
become involved with it.  Ron Howard is one of the executive producers
and Janet Meyers is the producer.  Philip Glass is credited with
something like "creative musical direction", the meaning of which is
vague but the sound track does have a Glassian quality to it.  
     It has also attracted a number well-known backers to pay for it.
The names Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Sundance, Pepsi,
and Coors appear in the credits, too.  As well as that of Amnesty
International.
     Amnesty International is certainly central to CLOSET LAND, which is
about a woman being interrogated and tortured to make her sign a
confession that her children's book is politically subversive.  This is
a movie about the horror of torture and the ability of the human mind to
resist.
     CLOSET LAND transpires almost entirely in one all-purpose room and
consists of Rickman and Stowe alternately torturing and being tortured
in physical, emotional, and psychological ways.  The worst, bloodiest
violence, as in a Greek tragedy, takes place in the dialogue
descriptions and away from the view of the audience.  The rest is
nakedly exposed to us.
     The most interesting thing about the story is that at one dramatic
moment the victim and the tormentor trade places.  From then on, he
knows he can't win no matter what else happens and she knows she can't
lose even if she can't escape.  I don't think I have even seen this
before.
     The weakest aspect of the movie is that it is definitely a filmed
play and not a movie as such.  Nothing is done that couldn't be done on
a live stage.  The film maker uses animation and a few limited special
effects, but a creative director could give us exactly the end results
on stage.  The movie is extremely talkative, limited to one set and two
actors.  It induces in the audience extreme claustrophobia and general
tension, which is to the good and part of the "message" of the film, but
it also limits the audience that will tolerate it.
     Certainly the strongest parts of the movie are its point of view
and its actors.  The point of view I'll leave mostly to those of you who
will be lucky enough to see CLOSET LAND, for it has a very limited
release; but it may show up in the better video stores in a few months.
Suffice it to say that the film's view of political violence--abduction,
terror, and torture--is both complex and unequivocal.  Indeed, the
hope it offers against these evils is decidedly of a spiritual and/or
moral sort, that may be of little comfort to the materialists amongst
us, but which comforts, informs, and ennobles the struggle against
torture and its kin.
     The actors are perfectly wonderful.  One would be hard-pressed to
say who outacts the other.  Rickman is the more identifiable as a movie
actor for me--he has often played intellectual heavies-and so his
performance is less surprising perhaps.  His character is an actor, too,
in a way, and so he gets the fun of playing an actor acting which is
always impressive, I think.  Stowe is less familiar to me, but I won't
soon forget the moral commitment she brought to her performance; her
appearance is amazingly flexible and she has a marvelous sense of her
body in her acting.  She also projects complete conviction whether she's
terrified, outraged, or triumphant.
     CLOSET LAND is one of the roughest movies I have sat through in a
long time because it is one of the truest and it personally challenges
me as the audience to measure up to its outrage and its ideals.  I
recommend it highly to all who get a chance to see it.

Title
Review for Mom and Dad Save the World (1992)
     The following are not full-scale reviews per se, but rather short
notices of two films I've seen recently: BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER and
MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD.
########################################################
     BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER was directed by Fran Rubel Kazui, from a
script by Joss Whedon, and stars Kristy Swanson, Donald Sutherland, Paul
Rubens, Rutger Hauer, and Luke Perry.  Kazui (TOKYO POP) has given us a
occult black comedy on a shoestring budget -- only one of the points of
contrast with DEATH BECOMES HER, which opened the same weekend.  Since
there was no money for the usual f/x hijinks we associate with vampire
movies in general, Kazui concentrates on his characters' comic
possibilities.  The result is spotty at best, but BUFFY has its moments
and the overall effect is charming to viewers who approach it with a
minimum of expectations.  Swanson has the valley girl thing down, even
if the whole phenomenon is ten years out of date.  But still she's
energetic and gives it her all.  Donald Sutherland as her mentor is
probably walking through the part and cashing his check before it
bounces; but it is always good to see Sutherland on the screen even in a
walk-through.  Rutger Hauer did not strike me as a very sinister head
vampire.  However, Paul Rubens as his go-fer was slightly wonderful,
probably the best thing about this flick; I appreciated the fact that he
was made up to look like his mug shot, and his death scene was amusingly
drawn out and tentative.  On the other hand Luke Perry pretty much
proved he had better be investing his TV salary, because he has a very
limited future in the movies; he was utterly flat and without screen
presence, something Swanson had in abundance.
     In the words of "The Hitchhiker's Guide," BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER
is mostly harmless, a no-brainer kind of mid-afternoon retreat to a
cheap matinee from the harsh reality of August.  Or better yet, rent the
video next winter.  It will warm your cockles a little.
##################################################
     MOM AND DAD SAVE THE WORLD was directed by Greg Beeman, from a
script by Chris Matheson and Ed Solomon, and starred Teri Garr, Jeffrey
Jones, and Jon Lovitz, with Wally Shawn, the late Thalmus Rasalala,
Dwier Brown, and Kathy Ireland; it is rated PG.
     This is another mostly harmless, brainless confection that wins
through with energy, determination, and good will.  The set and costumes
are heavily retro, equally influenced by BRAZIL and ROAD WARRIOR and THE
WIZARD OF OZ, by Las Vegas and Bugsy Siegal, by Antonio Gaudi and
Dr. Seuss and Liberace.  The effect is the kind of campiness that is
easy to take and easy to forget later on in the day.  It makes a few
mistakes -- the fish women and dog men are particularly ill-advised --
but the casting of Garr and Jones as the title characters was inspired.
It is they who save the movie, as much as the World.  They are cheerful
and dynamic and infectious in their willingness to cooperate with the
silly proceedings.  Wally Shawn has a small part as a kindly torturer,
Rasafala looks properly uncomfortable, Jon Lovitz is much funnier in A
LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, Dwier Brown and Kathy Ireland easy on the eyes in
their skimpy outfits that match their mentalities (actually, Brown was
thoroughly funny while being dense in an almost Pythonesque way), and
there is an uncredited cameo of some note (see the spoiler at the bottom
for the identity of the mystery guest).
     This is another candidate for a cheap matinee or for video viewing
later on this year.  I think some of you may be gently entertained; I
was.
     The cameo appearance was by Bill Murray officiating at the wedding.
A rather funny little role, made funnier by a hair-do right out
Munchkinland.

Title
Review for Un coeur en hiver (1992)
     UN COEUR EN HIVER (A HEART IN WINTER) is a 1992 French film
directed by Claude Sautet.  The cast includes Daniel Auteuil,
Emmanuelle Beart, Andre Dussolier, and Elisabeth Bourgine.  The film is
unrated, in French with English subtitles.
     UN COEUR EN HIVER is a welcome antidote for the summer glut of
big-bucks, effects-rich, story-poor action films.  UN COEUR has won
extensive honors in Europe, and rightly so, including 1992 Cesars (the
French Oscars) for best director (Claude Sautet) and best supporting
actor (Andre Dussolier) with nominations for Daniel Auteuil and
Emmanuelle Beart for best male  and female actor, respectively.  Sautet
is a masterful director with a breath-taking sense of timing, of when
to cut and when to linger, a master of silences that speak volumes.  He
placed the images of his film on top a sound track that includes many
fragments of the incredibly beautiful Sonatas and Trio of Maurice
Ravel, perfect choice--passionate, intimate chamber music to illuminate
a film about passion.  Indeed, it is not too far-fetched to regard UN
COEUR as a kind of chamber film, if you will, more at home in intimate
surroundings than grand auditoria, a film of intimate and delicately
controlled emotionalism, a film in which three players enact of quiet
drama.
     Beart plays an up-and-coming violinist who through most of the
film is either rehearsing or recording the Ravel.  It is no small
achievement that she completely convinced me and my partner Lyndol
(himself a musician) that she was playing the complex, passionate music
with authority and virtuosity.  In actuality, the music was performed
by Jean-Jacques Kantorow.
     Beart is one of the cinema's great beauties, in addition to being
an actor of taste and intelligence.  Here she plays Camille.  Beart's
physical beauty is perfect match for Camille's precise, demanding,
perfectionist aesthetics.  And when in a critical scene Camille appears
drunk, her make-up garish and sloppy, her hair as disarrayed as her
emotions and her career and art momentarily put to one side, it is
profoundly shocking, deeply painful.
     Camille's foil is Stephan, played by Auteuil.  Stephan is a failed
musician who has become a master violin maker and restorer.  Stephan is
handsome, introverted, denying himself love and passion, denying even a
capacity to love, a giant ear (as he is called by one of his victims),
casually cruel in his refusal to love others.  He lives a spartan life,
as spare of emotion as it is of furniture.  His partner, Maxim
(Dussolier), has taken Camille as his lover, in the process disrupting
a relationship between the violinist and her agent and mentor and
apartment-mate (Elisabeth Bourgine).  Maxim furthers Camille's
education and growth, but it Stephan whom she desires.  The more
Stephan tells her that he is unavailable, the more obsessed Camille
becomes with him.  He indulges himself in a games of approach and
avoidance that takes on a life of its own and eventually hurts all
three in this reticent menage a trois.
     Reticence is at the heart of this film's style and greatness.  The
dialogue of silences, passionate refusal to touch and be touched, the
emptying of emotions are acts of privacy carried out largely in public,
in bars, rehearsal halls, on the streets of Paris.  The one scene of
overt emotionalism, acted out in a familiar bar-restaurant, is cleverly
foreshadowed in the same bar by a different, less austere couple.  They
recover quickly, whereas the principals never fully recover the things
that were last in that later scene.
     The film is also illuminated by a quiet cinematography that works
the ambient light as extension of the story, as part of the dialogue.
The design, likewise, is restrained, unobtrusive.  Even Auteuil's
Christian Dior wardrobe is too rich, too tasteful to call attention to
itself.
     One of our local critics sees UN COEUR as revisionist comment on
the French Lover of movie history.  Only Maxim fits the suave, debonair
role, but even he is far from the stereotype in his actions and words.
Stephan as the anti-lover is far from the stumbling, bumbling, clownish
Pierre Richard sort of French comic tradition.  I don't object to the
critic putting the film in a filmic context.  However, I think this
aspect is only one of the subtexts here even though I don't want to
write much about what I see is the meaning of UN COEUR since that would
require an essay of a very personal nature and like Stephan I would
prefer not to expose myself to my own emotions.
     Instead, let me get by with saying that UN COEUR EN HIVER is a
mature, accomplished, complete achievement of fine French filmmaking.
It is a film that I recommend to any adult at any price and a film I
hope you get a chance to see.

Title
Review for This Is My Life (1992)
     THIS IS MY LIFE is a film directed by Nora Ephron and written by
Nora Ephron and Delia Ephron.  The film stars Julie Kavner, Samantha
Mathis, Gaby Hoffman, Carrie Fisher, Dan Ackroyd.  Rated R, due to
safe-sex scene.
     THIS IS MY LIFE was a mostly disappointing experience, I regret to
say.  Julie Kavner has been one of my special favorites ever since she
first essayed Brenda Morgenstern on THE MARY TYLER MOORE SHOW and then
on the spin-off RHODA.  Since then, she's been in five Woody Allen films
and has played both Allen's mother (in RADIO DAYS) and his girlfriend
(in the Allen segment of NEW YORK STORIES), and she is in the forthcoming
Allen movie FOG AND SHADOWS.  Of course, she's also the voice of Marge
Simpson and was on THE TRACEY ULLMAN SHOW for three years before The
Simpsons took off.  She's a funny woman and I really looked forward to
her first role in which she carried a whole movie.
     Unfortunately, I failed to allow for the Ephron sisters, either
singly or in tandem, who first of all produced a completely unoriginal,
entirely predictable script that features the worse parts of PUNCHLINE
(the Tom Hanks & Sally Fields movie about stand-up comics) and MERMAIDS
(the Cher-Winona Ryder-Bob Hoskins confection of a couple of Christmases
ago--Samantha Mathis even looks like Winona Ryder).  We have definitely
seen this movie before.
     Nora Ephron's direction stretches out a half-hour sitcom into a
full-length snoozer, unfunny, dull, with hardly a joke in it.  Ephron
has provided not one but two competing voice-over narrators, one usually
being bad enough of an idea.  Each claims that this is her story.  Maybe
that's the problem, nobody ever figured out whose story it was, after
all.
     The script was adapted from a novel by Meg Wolitzer.  One can only
assume the novel was funnier, or at least more focused.  Dottie Engels
(Kavner) is never allowed to do a monologue; her voiceover upstages her
every time she gets on stage except when she has a couple of very
unfunny, very tired old jokes to tell about placenta creams and her dead
Aunt in Heaven; where's a voiceover when you need one?  Dan Aykroyd, who
is supposed to be some great shakes of an agent, seems mostly asleep --
he has one shtick and it ain't good enough.  Carrie Fisher comes closest
to being actually funny, but even she is at a loss of what do with her
underwritten part.  The greatest problem with the script is that Dottie
goes from demoing makeup to getting third billing in Vegas in the course
of a year, she suddenly gets the Agent to Die For for no perceptible
reason, and she makes $130,000 go further in Manhattan real estate than
anyone since Peter Stuyvesant.  In other words, the script is
unmotivated and unrealistic.  And shame on the Ephron sisters for this
mess!
     Bobbie Byrne's cinematography is dull and lifeless, even as he
steals a shot or two of Vegas signage from RAIN MAN.  Carly Simon's
songs add nothing excepts an unnecessary recapitulation of the "story so
far."  I hope she's not counting on a lot of MTV airtime with the
inevitable video outtake.
     Finally, you have got to wonder about the MPAA when they slap an R
on a movie for one scene in which a teenage boy fumbles with his first
condom, a scene with no nudity and no concupiscence.
     I cannot recommend THIS IS MY LIFE to anyone at any price unless
the person is a diehard fan of Julie Kavner and she or he has to see her
first starring role, regardless.

Title
Review for Glengarry Glen Ross (1992)
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is a film directed by James Foley, from a
script by David Mamet, based on Mamet's play of the same name.  It stars
Al Pacino, Jack Lemmon, Ed Harris, Alan Arkin, Kevin Spacey, with Alec
Baldwin and Jonathan Pryce.  Photography by Juan Ruiz Anchiaad and music
by James Newton Howard.  Rated R, due to rough language.
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS won David Mamet a Pulitzer nine years ago.
Mamet has written the screenplay for the movie version in which he has
preserved the nervy, shorthand rhythms of the salesmen.  It is the
dialog, faultlessly executed, the choppy interplay of half-developed
ideas and over-repeated assertions that captures the panic, desperation,
and limitations of the characters and their hapless lives.
     In the process, Mamet has added a new character, played by Alec
Baldwin, whose function is to clarify the situation for the audience,
and several new scenes.  The movie also benefits from the canny
direction of James Foley, the expressionistic photography of Juan Ruiz
Anchiaad, and the jazzy background music of James Newton Howard.  But
mostly, of course, the film luxuriates in the presence of one of the
most impressive ensemble casts of U.S. male actors assembled for one
film in many years.
     In speaking of the actors, one hardly knows where to begin.
Perhaps with the team acting of Alan Arkin as the lost, unnerved George
Aaronow, and Ed Harris, as the poison-spewing Dave Moss.  Their verbal
pas de deux, in the salesmen's lounge, in a car, in the Imperial-red
Chinese restaurant, despite the anger, the desperation, become an
esoteric comedy act, a kind of high-level "Who's on First" routine piped
through a Gatling gun.  Staccato bursts of such complete understanding
that conventional sentences are no longer required alternate with
deceit, revelations, and the inability to understand simple assertions.
These are men whose lives are based on playing fast and loose with both
language and truth, whose every utterance is laced with meanings
accessible only to the cognoscenti.
     Then there's Kevin Spacey as the ice-cold John Williamson, the
office manager, the go-fer for the unseen Mitch and Murray who own this
seedy little sales office under the elevated train tracks.  Williamson
hands out the hot leads to the closers and recycles the cold ones to the
salesmen who aren't.  He's the hitman, the executioner, who is willing
to commute the sentence only for a sizable bribe.  He is universally
hated and reviled because he is not a salesman, he's a bureaucrat, not a
"man in a man's business."  The issue of manhood, which is central to
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, is particularly focused on the character of
Williamson.  Spacey reads the role perfectly, thawing out only at the
prospect of bribery or revenge, like any spoiled, sulky child.
     Williamson's role as executioner is aided and abetted by the
unnamed character played by Alec Baldwin.  Baldwin appears in one scene
only, a scene written for the movie, a sales meeting in which the
desperate situation is outlined clearly and mercilessly.  Baldwin
flaunts his BMW, his Rolex, his income, his brass testicles (one wonders
whom he castrated to get them) taunts the failing salesmen as queers and
otherwise impugns their "manhood."  He struts, threatens, insults,
patronizes, and does a riveting job of exemplifying, of symbolizing, the
worst of free enterprise as dining with cannibals: eat or be eaten is
the only rule.
     Al Pacino plays Ricky Roma the only success in this hellish office.
His control of language, his ability to mimic language, to mimic
meaning, in his sales rap has put him on top, made him the prince of the
hour.  Pacino's scene in the glowing red interior of the restaurant qua
Inferno with Jonathan Pryce, his next victim, is a dizzying mix of
obfuscation masked as candor, of a parody of "male bonding," of words
without meaning, of courtship and seduction, and booze and smarmy malice
slippery as an iceberg in an oil slick
     Pryce himself delivers what may well be the most amazing
performance in a film that is virtually defined by remarkable
performances.  First as the dazzled mark and then as the apologetic,
wife-driven backslider, Jonathan Pryce displays an amazing range of
emotions on his rubbery face that suffuse it in the rapid, smooth,
transparent successions of color-switching octopus.  He has to get out
of the deal, but in doing so he is also driven to apologize for letting
Roma down, in another statement on the absurdity and touching
sentimentalism of male friendships.
     Finally, a word of praise for Jack Lemmon as Shelly "the Machine"
Levine.  The rumpled, wrinkled duffle bag of better times, down on his
luck, unable to sell his worthless properties, his daughter in the
hospital, the money for special care running out, desperate for a taste
of that old success that won him his now too-ironic nickname -- all
these Lemmon captures with a veteran grace and effortlessness in the
kind of performance that would have won him a knighthood, were he a
British actor.  We sympathize with Shelly without liking or approving of
him and his scams, such is the skill that Lemmon brings to his part.
     What's it all about, I asked myself and my friend, whose reviews
also appear on the net from time to time, as we exited the film.  The
ending is desultory at best, not satisfying dramatically and is perhaps
is a little disorienting, distracting.  The foci of the script seem to
be twofold: a critique of capitalism and free enterprise and a dual
attack on and an encomium to a world of men, maleness, and machismo.
How do the two interact?  What is the influence of the shark-pack
pressures of having to be always closing on the natural friendships of
men?  Were these men corrupted by the system?  They don't see themselves
as corrupt; Roma, I think it is, says "We're salesmen, not thieves."
     Yes, well, that is the question, ain't it?  Salesmen are men who
sell, what they sell is hardly relevant.  Mamet is not about to have one
idea about any large subject.  His world is one of conflict, mixed
emotions, and ambiguity.  It would be a distortion, I think, to say that
Mamet wants us to react to his themes in any one way.  Much more likely,
he wants us to become sensitized to the complexities and moral
ambiguities, to say that there is conflict in our values, to see the
good and ill of basic things.
     The comparisons for GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS are usually in the
criticism I've read so far with DEATH OF A SALESMAN.  Without getting
an extended digression of about similarities and differences, the film I
kept thinking about was TIN MEN, Barry Levinson's second Baltimore film,
about aluminum-siding salesmen.  Willy Loman is not the type for The
Machine, instead Shelly Levine seems a lot more like Danny DeVito's
character, an honest thief, a manly man doing manly work, if only the
powers that be would let him.
     I recommend GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS for anyone with an appetite for a
serious film, intensely dramatic, darkly comic, and for some of the
finest film acting one is going to encounter this year.  Well worth full
ticket price to the right film-goer.  But if the f-word bothers you,
please stay away; the language is strictly barracks-level in this
regard.

Title
Review for Noises Off... (1992)
     NOISES OFF is a film directed by Peter Bogdanovich, from a
screenplay by Marty Kaplan and adapted from a play by Michael Frayn.  It
stars Carol Burnett, Michael Caine, John Ritter, Marilu Henner, Denham
Elliott, Julie Hagerty, Mark Linn-Baker, Christopher Reeve, and
Nicollette Sheridan.  Rated PG-13, for mild profanity, mature humor.
     NOISES OFF is structurally a farce-within-a-farce about the
out-of-town tryouts of a mild British sex comedy, "Nothing On."  Michael
Caine is the director, who is just trying to get through it while his
mind is on other projects, personal and professional.  Carol Burnett is
the aging star with her own money in the project.  Ritter, Henner,
Elliott, Reeve, and Sheridan play the actors who are similarly
distracted by love, jealousy, brainlessness, deafness, and/or
dipsomania.  Linn-Baker and Hagerty play the stage director and his
assistant.
     It took a while for me to warm up to the broad physical humor and
rapid-fire, throw-away dialog, but by the middle section of the movie I
was howling.  The cast is to be lauded for the tight, faultlessly and
energetically complex timing of their comings and goings in front of and
behind the set.  The onstage farce is a virtual study in the art of
door-slamming so essential to the bedroom farce since at least the
heyday of Feydeau.  The action gets even more complicated as the
relations between the cast members heat up and the line between play and
life softens and finally dissolves.  Although the final scene is a given
from the first, it is a delight to get there.
     This is not a film that is going to find a mass audience, which is
a shame, given the huge amout of talent used to present it.  Everyone
was at the top of his or her farcical form, and Bogdanovich has a
penchant for casting wonderful performers who don't get nearly enough
exposure, such as Burnett and Ritter.  Ritter especially seems to be
wasted by Hollywood, although I vastly prefer his movies, such as
Bogdanovich's earlier THEY ALL LAUGHED and the glow-in-the-dark comedy
he made for the director of VICTOR/VICTORIA, to the rather annoying
"cutie" persona that television saddled him with.  Bogdanovich elicits
from his cast some genuinely inspired teamwork and split-second timing
of non-stop gags.
     It is true, however, that NOISES OFF is very obviously a filmed
play, not a movie per se.  It is impossible to get this story, in love
as it is with the craziness of live theater, out from behind the
proscenium and into the streets, as movies generally require.
     I recommend NOISES OFF, but you might as well pay matinee prices as
not.  It's a confection, but a very entertaining one.

Title
Review for Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991)
     ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES is a film starring Kevin Costner,
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Morgan Freeman, and Alan Rickman.  The
film was directed by Kevin Reynolds, written by Pen Densham and John
Watson.
     This morning before I went to the first showing of ROBIN HOOD I
read a review of the film in the morning paper.  The reviewer was pretty
disappointed and reading the review so was I.  A few hours later I was
sitting the darkened auditorium and enjoying the hell out of myself.  I
have some reservations, mostly about Costner himself, but overall I can
recommend ROBIN HOOD to anyone who enjoys action/adventure movies.
     All the principals and most of the supporting players are obviously
having a wonderful time.  The exception, as I have indicated, is Kevin
Costner.  Now, I am a fan of Costner's, but I felt he was very
uncomfortable with large parts of his role here.  Often his speech was
too flat, as if he didn't know how to read his lines, hampered by the
most curious and unnecessary accent.  Being an American actor, Costner, 
apparently, is not trained in doing accents, so he did not attempt to
sustain even a stage-British accent, but instead compromised by
broadening some vowels and dropping some r's.  The effect is slightly
silly, but most noticible only when he is slugging his way doggedly
through set-piece speeches.  In a tete-a-tete, on the other hand, with
Mastrantonio, he speaks and sounds easy and natural, with richer
inflections and a blessed reversion to his natural accent.  I think, I'm
afraid, that Costner should have limited himself to the role of producer
for ROBIN HOOD and in the future to stick the purely American roles that
I have loved him previously.  (Lyndol, my best sounding board, however,
says he had no problems with Costner as Robin Hood, so I expect as many
viewers to say I'm too harsh as to say I'm too easy on our star.)
     Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, on the other hand, was simply perfect
as the Lady Marian.  She brought a strength and independence to the
familiar character that I've never seen before (although I've never seen
ROBIN AND MARIAN, so I'm prepared to be corrected here, as elsewhere).
She's brave, intelligent, aggressive and assertive, a natural born
leader herself.  And she's an older Marian than the one's I'm used to,
not a crone, but surely a mature woman.  All these reasons make her
excessive screaming in the climactic sword fight all the more
unacceptable and irritating.  This is certainly a Hollywood tradition
(Basinger in BATMAN, or Hawn in BIRD ON A WIRE, par exemple) and maybe a
dramaturgical problem as well (the third party has to have something to
do while she's on "stage"), but I don't have to like it.
     An unusual addition to the familiar cast of the Robin Hood legend
is Azeem, the Moor, played by Morgan Freeman.  I enjoyed Freeman's
charaterization of Azeem enormously.  In some ways, he was our
spokesman, our eyes, the one who sees the barbarism of Merry Olde
England and comments on it both in words and body language.  Also,
Freeman was subtly and hugely funny; his relationship to Robin was the
occasion of several of the better jokes in the movie.  And Freeman look
marvelous, younger and in better shape than I've seen him in years.
Some people are going to say that Azeem was added to the story as a
token gesture to Costner's sense of political correctness, but I
remember that wondeful Richard Greene Robin Hood TV series from the
early 1950s in which one episode featured a Saracen dazzling the Merry
Men with his superior technology and nobility, and another episode
featured a Byzantine princess, who was even more exotic in that context
of Sherwood Forest.  Legends are always updated in their details by the
storytellers, and the presence of Azeem in this version is both welcome
and interesting, in my humble opinion.
     And speaking of comic roles, I was totally unprepared for the
hilarious reading Alan Rickman brought to his interpretation of the
Sheriff of Nottingham.  Rickman, of course, is famous nowdays as a major
heavy, genius, psychopath, torturer (do see CLOSETLAND if you can).  And
here as the Sheriff, a role usually more buffoonish than satanic, he
combines the psychopath with the comedian in way that was sinister,
ridiculous, threatening, hilarious, and made all the more evil by an
underlying childishness.  Rickman is a brilliant actor, who has mastered
the physical side of acting.  The slightest gesture, the smallest
movement of his eyelids communicate and communicate volumes about his
character.  Rickman is the true star of ROBIN HOOD and the real reason
to see it.
     (Another acting appearance I was also unprepared for comes in the
form of a surprise and wonderful cameo at the very end of the movie.
You will love it.  But don't spoil for anyone else.)
     There is an element of fantasy that has been added to the legend
here, also, which I am of two minds about.  The Sheriff keeps a witch in
his castle, a witch who raised him, who advises him, who prognosticates
successfully for him, and who even fights for him.  It's not quite
right, not quite wrong, and I'll be interested to hear how others react
to it.  Generally, I like magic and witches in my movies, and this witch
is having a grand time living up to the traditions of her role.  But is
it really necessary in order to give some rhyme or reason to the
Sheriff's personality?
     The photography, the sets, and the location scenery are all
wonderful, as they should be for $50 million.  The action is decidely
Spielbergian; the director Kevin Reynolds is a former protege of the
master and he learned his lessons well.  Unfortunately, he didn't have
much control over the other Kevin; indeed, the gossip is that the two
men were close friends going into the project and are no longer on
speaking terms, thanks to Costner's interference.  Costner, himself, has
been quoted recently as saying that it isn't what he wanted it to be;
he's complained that the relevance and meaning of the coy nude scene
(using a body double, I hear) was lost on the cutting room floor --
Marian is supposed to see the scars on Robin's back and understand that
he's grown during the Crusades.  From other things Costner's been
saying, I'd say he needs a good enema, but hey! what do I know about
the pressures of being a superstar?
     I miss Prince John, however.  Making the Sheriff, a royal servant,
into a major player in England's dynastic politics makes no sense
historically and introduces more ridiculousness into the script than a
boatload of Moors and witches.  The script, by the way, is loaded with
awkward locutions, stilted speeches only marginally made acceptable by
the skill of the actors.
     ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES, is not an unqualified success, but
it has more enough strengths and will be talked about enough this summer
that I can, without hesitation, recommend it to you, even at full ticket
prices.

Title
Review for One False Move (1991)
     ONE FALSE MOVE is a film directed by Carl Franklin, from a script
by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson.  It stars Cynda Williams, Bill
Paxton, Michael Beach, and Bill Bob Thornton.  Rated R, for violence,
strong language.
     ONE FALSE MOVE is a quirky and surprising thriller.  It begins with
a scene of horrifying brutality and violence.  One thinks that he or she
has seen this before and knows what is going to follow: vengeance, cops
and druggies, mayhem and high-speed car chases.  But even at the
beginning one knows he or she is in for something different, if just
because of the camerawork that makes one's skin creep.  And then a
sudden change of pace and place, with some comedy thrown in, and the
disorientation is complete.  This is not going to be a routine Hollywood
formula film.
     By the time the film comes to its conclusion, it has widened its
aims and taken charge of a surprisingly broad territory.  Racism,
justice, abuses of all sorts, prejudices, the gap between rural and
urban, all these are fresh as the last headline.  The story is sharp as
a crease, powerfully told, with plenty of twists and turns to keep
anyone off balance.
     The story, by the way, or at least the script, was co-written by
one of the actors, Billy Bob Thornton, who plays a white-trash coke head
who is barely under control at the best of times.  He and his co-writer
Tom Epperson provided a script full of taut writing, tight plotting,
full of energy and discipline.
     The other actors are equally up to the demands of the script as
Thornton.  Cynda William as Fantasia is the touch point, the pivot, of
the story.  It's her mysterious, ambiguous role in the story that
provides the most interest.  She is the worst of the worst, yet driven
by the tenderest of emotions.  She's elegant, beautiful, treacherous,
passive, possessed by more demons that would seem possible to pack into
her small frame.
     Michael Beach is the third member of this particular menage.  An
ex-con with a genius IQ, a passing resemblance to Malcom X, and a taste
for knifework.  He's cold and focused and very scary.
     The cops include Jim Metzler as Dud Cole and Earl Billings as John
McFeely, two LAPD officers who find they have to work with the hickish
Dale "Hurricane" Dixon, played by Bill Paxton.  This is more Paxton's
movie, more Dixon's story, than anyone else's, although the script tries
to fool you into dismissing him as a swaggering rube.  And he is due for
some come-uppances, some course corrections for his life.  At first he
appears irritating, foolish, headstrong, childishly self-involved,
mostly harmless even if thoughtlessly racist and casually abusive of his
powers.  His wife (Natalie Canerday) puts her quiet wisdom on display
when she sums him up with: "Dale doesn't know any better -- he watches
TV.  I read nonfiction."
     Paxton may play Hurricane a little too broadly at first, but in the
latter parts of the film his characterization takes on depth, dimension,
color, and complexity.
     A word of praise should also go to the musical score by Peter
Haycock and Derek Holt and to the photography of James L. Carter.
     Finally, let me say something briefly about the director, Carl
Franklin.  He has managed to give us a portrait of life on both sides of
the color line that is probably unique.  He finds the contact point
between human folly and inhuman crime.  He lets one of the characters
speak a line that rings loud since the LA riots: "Looking guilty is
being guilty for black people."  But he puts it in the mouth of Fantasia
after she has fully joined in her companions crimes.  He is a very
assured director, and I await with pleasure his next film.

Title
Review for Bill & Ted's Bogus Journey (1991)
     BILL AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY is a film starring Keanu Reeves, Alex
Winter, and William Sadler, with George Carlin.
     Two Keanu Reeves movies in one week (the other being POINT BREAK)!
But first, let me salvage my reputation as a Serious Film Guy.  I never
saw BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, but now I would like to.  (That
didn't help.)  How about this?  Lyndol and I *needed* to see film, it
was too daunting to drive all the way to the art-film district (20
miles) and we didn't want to see anything else in the 'burbs (that we
hadn't already seen), such as PROBLEM CHILD 2 or REGARDING HENRY.  But
mostly Lyndol's developed this thing for Reeves in the last week.
Really, I didn't have a choice, I was just following orders.
     Okay, the review (which I promise will not tax anyone's attention
span):
     BILL AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY is a totally silly flick, but it is
(if I have a handle on the jargon) totally non-heinous.  In fact, it's
rather charming and sweet.  And some of it is very funny.  There's a
certain amount of exposition that slows down the opening 15 minutes or
so, and a lot of references to the previous, aforementioned EXCELLENT
ADVENTURE, some of which were obviously lost on me and delightful to
most of the audience.
     Winter reminds me of Sean Penn's benevolent twin and Reeves may be
a little long in the tooth for the role now, but together they are
energetic, cheerful, well-intentioned, and unsinkable.  They confront
death, the devil, hell, heaven, the smartest being in the universe, and
God (who is not a rich Republican in a long beard).  They cover a lot
of territory and never so much as dent their air guitars.
     However, they are in danger of losing their movie to William
Sadler, who plays the Grim Reaper with a fine, absurdist sense of
anything goes.  He and the boys do a particularly satisfying send-up of
Bergman's chess-playing Death.  It's quite intellectual.  Really.
     So, unless you're terminally serious, you'll have a good time.
However, with this much fluff, I can't recommend you pay more than cheap
matinee prices.

Title
Review for Bugsy (1991)
     BUGSY is a film by Barry Levinson.  It was written by James Toback.
It stars Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, Harvey Keitel, Ben Kingsley,
Elliott Gould, Joe Mantegna.  Rated R for language and violence.
     BUGSY is the film biography of Benjamin "Bugsy" Siegel, a Jewish
gangster, a psychopathic killer, and the "inventor" of Las Vegas.
Siegel has been recently portrayed in THE MARRYING MAN and MOBSTERS and,
perhaps as Hollywood's resident mobster in the Forties, exercises a
powerful charm of the movie makers of today.  Certainly, James Toback's
funny, alarming, and insightful script loves Siegel, makes us want to
love him, even while fully informing us from time to time, lest we
forget, that he really was totally bugsy, out of his mind, a very scary
guy.  Maybe, it's only because Siegel's been dead for almost 35 years
that it's safe to see him as an American dreamer and visionary.
     First and foremost, the screen belongs to Warren Beatty, who has
seemed to me to be a mostly underappreciated treasure by the movie-going
public.  Instead of focusing on his famous romances, the public could
spend the time more instructively studying his subtle mastery in movies
like McCABE AND MRS. MILLER, SHAMPOO, and BONNIE AND CLYDE, as well as
his behind-the-camera talents in the wonderful REDS, inter alia.  And
here Beatty gives the fullest, most unreserved demonstration of his
formidable powers the camera has ever recorded.
     And Annette Bening as Virginia Hill, the starlet and gun moll
Siegel fell madly in love with, may be the only female actor of her
generation who could hold her own against Beatty's Siegel, as indeed
Hill was the only one who could defy the gangster.  Some critics are
comparing her to Barbara Stanwyck as the very type of the
tough-Forties-sexy dame; maybe, but I think Bening head and shoulders
above anything Stanwyck ever did.  She's every bit as volcanic and
unpredictable as her lover, proud, inpatient, no-bull-shit, and
glamorous, in way movie women seldom are these days.
     BUGSY is overflowing in excellent character performances, too.
Harvey Keitel as Mickey Cohen and Joe Mantegna as George Raft are
Siegel's friends, allies, and go-fers, supporters who can't stop their
friend's inevitable burn-out.  Ben Kingsley is the syndicate boss Meyer
Lansky, cold and concerned.  The late rock promoter Bill Graham is
unexpectedly good as Lucky Luciano.  And Elliott Gould, looking
positively fat, is the slow-witted stool pigeon Harry Greenberg.  This
is a rich diet for any movie.
     And it is all served served up so handsomely.  Lyndol, who loves
the Forties cars, was agog at the Continentals and 4-door Cadillac
convertible, the Packards and Lincolns.  Production designer Dennis
Gassner, costume designer Albert Wolsky, and cinematographer Allen
Daviau (E.T., AVALON) were used by Barry Levinson to create a Forties
Hollywood that looks new, deco-ish, slightly raw, glaring, color-soaked
exteriors and dark domestic interiors.
     Levinson himself deserves high praise for the way he's handled all
the disparate elements of his film to create a complex portrait of a man
who would easy to dismiss as a mere monster.  We see Siegel's darkness
(without understanding it), but we also see his romantic obsessions, his
attractiveness to men and women, a gangster and murderer, who stop in
the middle of a vicious beating to correct his ruffled appearance, who
was addicted to facials and cucumber-slices-on-the-eyes, who was more
interested in love and creation than in money.  His partners and
superiors in the Organization dismiss him as Bugsy, but never to his
face.
     You know, I think you ought to see BUGSY and the cost be hanged.
This is a great motion picture.

Title
Review for Of Mice and Men (1992)
     OF MICE AND MEN is a film directed by Gary Sinese, from a
screenplay by Horton Foote, based on the novel by John Steinbeck.  It
stars Gary Sinese, John Malkovich, Sherilyn Fenn, Ray Walston, Casey
Siemaszko, and Joe Morton.  Rated PG-13, due to mature themes, brief
violence.
     OF MICE AND MEN was first adapted to the big screen in 1939 in a
film directed by Lewis Milestone and starring Burgess Meredith and Lon
Chaney, Jr., and music by Aaron Copeland, a mere two years after the
novel's publication.  The story was adapted twice for TV (once with
Robert Blake and Randy Quaid, once with George Segal and Nicol
Williamson); it was also made into a opera that was produced twice by
Seattle Opera.  The script for this newest version was written by Horton
Foote (THE TRIP TO BOUNTIFUL), who downplays the novel's political
subtext, a call for a humane socialism where people take care of one
another.  Instead, Foote's version is content to redefine the human
condition on the individual level only.  This new version does succeed
in capturing Steinbeck's special feeling for the land.  The film was
stunningly photographed in California's Santa Ynez valley, a rolling
land of golden grass and live oaks.
     This film marks the introduction of director-star Gary Sinese as
one of the  future lights of Hollywood.  Sinese founded the Steppenwolf
Theatre in Chicago in the Seventies.  It was there that he and John
Malkovich first played George and Lennie in 1980.  As a director Sinese
shows a spare, delicate style.  As George, the smaller, smarter migrant
worker who has fallen reluctantly into the role of Lennie's protector,
Sinese is especially sympathetic and effective.
     As Lennie, the child-like giant, John Malkovich presents a more
problematic performance.  Malkovich is a star, not a character actor.
We are watching a star do a star turn when we watch Malkovich parade his
formidable and showy arsenal of shtick, the hands floating, bouncing,
the mouth in search for a shape, the stutters, shambling walk.  These
things might have worked brilliantly on stage, but on the big screen
they serve only to draw attention to the actor, not the character.
     On the other end of the end of the scale is the wonderful Ray
Walston as Candy, the withered old hand whose old dog foreshadows the
eventual culmination of the story.  Walston, perhaps best known to many
as Uncle Martin in that silly old TV series "My Favorite Martian", and
who had a brilliant career in musical comedy in the Forties and Fifties
(SOUTH PACIFIC, DAMN YANKEES), registers a heartbreaking performance as
the old man who says, "I wish someone would shoot me when I'm of no use
anymore.  But they won't, they'll just send me away."
     Among the other noteworthy performances are those of Casey
Siemaszko as the brutish Curly, Sherilyn Fenn, his unnamed wife, and Joe
Morton as Crooks, the broken stable hand.  Fenn in particular presents a
new take on her character.  The wife in this version is far more
dangerous and predatory than in Steinbeck's novel.  Initially acting
quite sluttish, she shows us eventually to be naive, lonely, and trapped
in an abusive marriage; she acts as a voice for a feminist consciousness
that probably never occurred to Steinbeck.  Likewise, the wonderful Joe
Morton (BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET) begins as the brutally, cruelly
angry Black man, eventually shows his pain and loneliness.  Both of
these unhappy people are brought out of their shells in contact with
Lennie, the confessor who understands almost nothing they tell him, so
they can tell him anything.
     I recommend OF MICE AND MEN without reservation even at full price.
It is visually beautiful.  It is thematically intelligent and important.
It is sensitive to its source and the debut of a great new movie talent.
Really, you must go.

Title
Review for Poison (1991)

rec.arts.sf-reviews because of the three pieces making up POISON,
one is fantasy and one is science fiction/horror. -Moderator]
     POISON is a film written and directed by Todd Haynes.  The cast
includes Larry Maxwell, Susan Norman, Scott Renderer, and James Lyon.
     POISON is simply a brilliant film.  I recommend it highly.  Not
only is it worth full-ticket price, it is worth a drive to another city,
since it is not being distributed very widely.  Even in film-loving
Seattle, it was booked into one of the theaters in the University
District, the most movie-intense neighborhood in Seattle, for a mere
12-day run.  That run concludes today as I write and whether it will be
continued at another venue is an open question.
     POISON has gotten some box-office power by being the latest target
of the Rev.  Donald Wildmon's American Family Association and its war on
queers.  And some reviewers have found it unsettling.  I call it a
challenging film, that has learned a new way to be a movie.  Its
structure, its narrative style, are challenging.  The contents are
fascinating, but hardly worthy of controversy.
     The source for its stories and its mood of angry isolation come
from the writings of Jean Genet.  Genet is quoted on screen from time to
time and his voice, as it were, can be heard especially in the narrative
of "Homo," one of the three interlocking stories that make up POISON.
Otherwise, the film presents more the spirit of Genet than it does
filmed versions of his novels.  Each of the three stories has a distinct
look and feel to it and the film can cut from one to the next without
difficulty or confusion.  In the end, it doesn't matter anyway, since
all three merge and conclude as a single unified piece.  This is a film
film-students need to study in depth.
     The first story we encounter is "Hero," a mock documentary about a
seven-year-old boy who, we are told in a dead pan voiceover, shot his
father to death and literally flew off the bedroom balcony.  The boy is
reconstructed with interviews with his teacher, neighbors, school mates,
and mother.
     The second story is "Horror," an absolutely perfect send-up of a
Roger-Corman, mad-scientist, b&w, cheapie sci-fi, Fifties film.  Haynes
once again has the look down perfectly.  The scientist is assisted by a
desperately bland Susan Norman, who ought to get some kind of award for
her achievement here.  "Horror" may be a parable of AIDS, or it may be
something less specific.  It like the others offers the pleasure of
sharp style and a serious observation about human nature, about
isolation and being different as a threat to the majority.
     The third component is the key to the controversy "Homo," a story
about a habitual criminal (like Genet himself), who is in prison and
falls in love with another prisoner, a man he knew at reform school.
There is some homosexual sex and male nudity in "Homo," but compared to
the rape and mayhem of so-called commercial movies there ought not to be
anything remarkable here for any but the most homophobic and/or
hypocritical.  Actually, the most shocking scene, the one that did
disturb me, was a terrible ritual of humiliation inflicted on a gay boy
by his straight fellow inmates in a flashback to the reformatory.  The
views of isolation, humiliation, love, and that prison we all live in
would be devastating if the story were not told in such an impassive,
detached manner.
     Detachment is the major fault of POISON overall.  And its saving
quality.  I think the movie would be too strong for me without the
distance the film puts between us and the stories.  The ironic use of
rather campy styles in two of the stories and the cutting back and forth
between the three release our tension and make POISON survivable.

Title
Review for Antonia and Jane (1991)
     ANTONIA AND JANE is a film directed by Beeban Kidron, produced by
George Faber, and written by Marcy Kahan.  The cast includes Imelda
Staunton and Saskia Reeves.  It is unrated, but includes some profanity
and nudity.
     ANTONIA AND JANE is probably more like MY DINNER WITH ANDRE than
just about any other film I've ever seen, yet even that comparison would
have to be qualified at length.  Critics have suggested some kinship
with THELMA & LOUISE, but that also conceals as much as it reveals about
the excellences of this fine film, which was originally shown on the BBC
in 1990 and is currently enjoying its U.S.  premiere in Seattle at the
Metro Cinemas.  Seattle first discovered this film at the International
Festival of Films by Women Directors in 1990.  It is a funny, meaningful
film about women's friendships.
     The two women are a pair 30-year-old Britishers, one, Antonia
(Saskia Reeves), upper-crusty and beautiful, the other, Jane (Imelda
Staunton), frumpish, bookish, Jewish, and no clothes sense whatsoever.
She's also given to attracting some very odd boyfriends.  Antonia and
Jane go back a long way, share some interesting details, and make each
other very insecure.  They meet once a year for dinner, apparently to
torture themselves.
     The movie's positive qualities include a tart and sardonic sense of
humor, a gift for slight exaggerations that strain but never quite
rupture our credulity.  The men in the two women's lives are pretty
pathetic creatures--I mean I don't mind a movie that says men are
dickheads, but these turkeys are bare human.  Perhaps this is merely a
facet of the film's very British sense of the absurd.  Certainly,
something is bound to be lost on purely American audiences--the class
undertones, for example.
     I have to say that I don't take ANTONIA AND JANE as seriously as I
took ANDRE, which seemed to be real people talking about real, if
fantastic and wonderful, things and ideas, or THELMA AND LOUISE, which
was ultimately more challenging and upsetting in what it concludes about
the choices facing women in our society.  By contrast ANTONIA AND JANE
appears to a bit on the fluffy side, rather like Henry Jaglom's essays
on women.  (I know, I praised EATING in this forum a few months and I
still stand by that praise, but that film is flawed by its own class
prejudices, too.)
     The main fault of the movie is its brief 75-minute running time.
It was made to fit into a TV schedule.  Pity there wasn't some
additional shot for the theatrical version to flesh out some of the
transitions and changes.  Or to extend the story.
     We do learn to care for these people, who at first seem somewhat
off-putting.  Just as they become real people, not merely unexplored
neuroses on the hoof, poof!  the film's over.  We'd like to see more of
them, basically.  What we do is a successful, but modest, relationship,
coming-of-postponed-age comedy, a witty film that says interesting about
friendship, things that can apply to any friendships regardless of
gender.  Certainly, my first thought on leaving the theater was a desire
to call an old friend from whom I have been estranged for the last
twelvemonth.
     I am delighted to recommend ANTONIA AND JANE, but matinee prices
will probably suffice.

Title
Review for Barcelona (1994)
     BARCELONA is a film written, directed, and produced by Whit
Stillman.  It stars Taylor Nichols, Chris Eigeman, Tushka Bergen.
Rated PG-13 for sexual references.
     BARCELONA is from same auteur who also created METROPOLITAN, the
1990 art-house hit about of a group of preppies going through the
Christmas deb season in New York.  In fact, two of the actors from that
film are in this one, Chris Eigeman and Taylor Nichols.  METROPOLITAN
was a satirical comedy of manners, with a gentle, forgiving nature, a
cross between (as the pitch goes in THE PLAYER) THE RETURN OF THE
SECAUCUS SEVEN and MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.
     BARCELONA was made on a considerably larger shoestring than its
predecessor ($3.2 million as compared to $300,000).  Stillman's Spanish
wife used her family and connections to provide assistance with the
costumes, the local casting, and the flamenco sequence.  His backer,
Castle Rock, was owed a favor by Columbia, and so Stillman got to use
the costumes from LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES for the costume party
sequence.  He also got Tom Cruise's naval officer's uniform from A FEW
GOOD MEN for Chris Eigeman to wear, as the self-absorbed lieutenant
j.g. who is the catalyst for much of the story's action.  Stillman's
wife also contributed dialogue, including one of the funnier jokes,
where Ted's date sees him at the costume party in an old blue suit and
says, "I like your outfit -- very New Wave." In short, BARCELONA looks
like a more expensive film and provides us States-bound viewer with a
lot of wonderful Barcelona scenery and landmarks.
     As for the story, Ted (Taylor Nichols) is a sales rep in Barcelona
for a U.S. company.  The time is the late '70s; Franco has only recently
departed the Spanish scene, the Cold War is in high gear, the
long-suppressed Left as well as the Sexual Revolution have come on
strong.  Into this potent mix comes another innocent abroad Fred (Chris
Eigeman), Ted's cousin and enemy.  (When the U.S. consul tells Fred he
isn't supposed to wear his uniform in Barcelona, for fear of provoking
anti-American reactions, Fred says, "I thought that just applied to the
Army.  Good men fought and died in this uniform to free Europe from
fascism ...."  The consul asks, "You were ROTC, weren't you.")
     Fred is, for reasons forever murky, the Navy's advance man for the
arrival of the Mediterranean fleet and moves in on his cousin, over the
latter's protests. (Ted, asking Fred how long he plans to stay, reminds
him that fish and company stink after three days, to which Fred
replies, "I think you'll find I stink on the first day.")  Both men are
fussy, theoretical, sexually repressed, and eccentric; neither is a
very sympathetic character, at least at first, and critics have
complained that there's no one to give the audience a point of view.
But that is the point of Stillman's film, as well as METROPOLITAN,
namely, character development.  The characters are the story, and the
plot is largely a device to develop the characterizations.
     The two young Americans meet some local women, relationships
develop along the usual one-step-forward, two-steps-back line when men
and women are getting to know each other.  The story and its players
find a crisis when Fred, the clueless lt. j-g, is publicly accused of
being a CIA agent.  From this point everything and everyone take one
step sideways, until the film concludes is a scene that had me and the
rest of my audience roaring with laughter.
     Laughing out loud is not the norm through most of the film, even
though it is witty and insightful.  That would be like guffawing at a
NEW YORKER piece: not advised, one might miss the next precious mot.
Then, too, Fred or Ted, or both, are more embarrassing than hilarious,
Ted with his obsession with "selling as a culture" and that falling in
love with a woman just because she's beautiful is somehow wrong and
Fred with his "you can't do that, I'm an American" attitudes straddling
the gap between jingoism and naivete like some Colossus of Toads.
     I high recommend BARCELONA to you.  I note that in the Seattle
area, at least, the film has moved out from its original art-house
venues to several suburban multiplexes.  I take this to be a sign that
the film's sly charms and virtues have some appeal to general
audiences.  See it, even if you have to pay full fare; it is worth it.
     (By the way, Whit Stillman's next film, also from Castle Rock,
will be THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO.  He says, "It's set in the '70s, about
three young women, recent college grads, and their first jobs as
publicists, against the last days of Studio 54.  So, lots of night
shots.  The director of photography is going to have nightmares.")

Title
Review for UndergÄºngens arkitektur (1989)
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM is a documentary film by Peter Cohen.  It
is narrated in German by Bruno Ganz.  Subtitled in English.  (Sweden,
1991.)  It is unrated, but contains scenes of the Holocaust.
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM is a detailed exposition of a unique
interpretation of Hitler and Nazism, namely that Hitler's ultimate goal
in all that he did was "beauty" (as understood by his limited, bourgeois
standards).  The mass murders of 70,000 mental and physical handicapped,
as well as the extermination of more than 10 million Jews, Gypsies, gay
people, and Slavs, as well as the burning of "degenerate" art and the
promotion of "Aryan" art, all these are expressions of the overriding
concern for beauty, according to Peter Cohen, a Swedish-German
documentarian.
     The film begins with Hitler's own paintings, kitschy postcard views
of old buildings.  Cohen documents the large number of failed or
frustrated artists that surrounded Hitler in the top echelon of the Nazi
leadership.  Cohen pulls together all the insane threads of the Third
Reich to create a coherent picture of the period as an immense, evil art
project.  Racial purity, eugenics, art, sculpture, architecture,
genocide are all aspects of the ultimate goal.
     Cohen depicts Hitler as the ultimate artist manque, designing the
party uniforms and emblems, planning a vast opera and thereby picking up
the work of his musical idol, Richard Wagner, designing national art
galleries, museums, opera houses, the Reich Chancellory, redesigning
Berlin as the capital of his world-empire-to-come, as well as the vast
rallies and art exhibits.
     Seeing the Third Reich, the Holocaust, and World War II as an art
project may seem at first blush to be reductive and trivializing to the
seminal events of our century.  Quite the opposite is the actual effect.
It makes one see the insidious threat behind every effort to limit
concepts of art and beauty to one standard, a la Strom Thurmond and Pat
Buchanan in the U.S.  currently.  To perpetuate these enormities in the
name of beauty makes it even more of a betrayal of our entire
civilization, emphasizing through the inherent irony perversion and
crimes too horrible to encompass.  And it makes ones suspect anyone who
speaks of beauty as if it were a tangible reality, not merely a way
saying "I like it".
     Cohen also makes a cogent argument that the Holocaust, the Final
Solution, the extinction of European Jewry, was so important that trains
for the death camps had priority over transport for his crumbling
armies.  Cohen tells us that Hitler realized after his armies bogged
during the Winter Campaign in the Soviet Union that he would not be
winning the war, but that Hitler felt that if he destroyed the Jews then
the great act for beauty would be Hitler's lasting legacy, that if he
left behind monuments, especially a racially pure Germany, and his own
legend, these would sufficient to inspire future generations to take up
Nazism again.  That Hitler nearly did succeed in wiping out European
Jewry is certainly true; that Nazism is not dead is also all too true.
     The film uses a vast store of stills and archive films to
illustrate the art, architecture, the propaganda, the war, the
Holocaust, and the "eugenics" program that was a dress rehearsal for the
Final Solution.  It ends with a basement full of oil portraits of the
Nazi leadership, a brilliant homage to the end of CITIZEN KANE.
     This is a very disturbing film that provides the viewer with a
closely reasoned and thoroughly argued thesis.  It is a sober and
serious film, long, gruelling, intellectually exciting, morally
disturbing.
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM was booked into Seattle for long weekend
run and will play spottily elsewhere, I'm sure.  If you can, see this
film.  Ask your art-house manager to book it; it is distributed by First
Run Features.  Look for it later in the video stores; it may become
available.  It will richly reward whatever efforts you must expend to
see it.

Title
Review for Late for Dinner (1991)
     LATE FOR DINNER is a film by W. D. Richter, written by Mark
Andrus, starring Brian Wimmer, Peter Berg, Marcia Gay Harden, and
Colleen Flynn.
     (Very minor *spoilers* follow, since I have to assume the premise of
this film is unknown to the majority of you.  It suddenly appeared in
Seattle without any advance word, as far as I know.)
     W. D. Richter was the director of BUCKAROO BANZAI (1984).  And in
its way, LATE FOR DINNER is just as odd, idiosyncratic, and surprising.
It is also half BACK TO THE FUTURE and half GHOST, with a touches of
BLADERUNNER thrown in for the hell of it.  This is a film about time
travel through hibernation, a theme at least as old as the novel LOOKING
BACKWARD, which was published in 1888; chances are one or more of you
will write me or post an even older example.  But LATE TO DINNER works
here, freshly and touchingly.
     Frank, played by Peter Berg, is our narrator, and, typically of
Richter, we get to see the entire movie through the eyes and perceptions
of someone who was brain-damaged at birth and left with the IQ of a
small child.  
     He and his brother-in-law, Willie, played by Brian Wimmer (who I
understand had a role on the TV series CHINA BEACH), get into some deep
trouble in 1962 in Santa Fe, are aided in his own way by a slightly mad,
or at least off-center, cryonics researcher, and who are accidentally
and impossibly reanimated in 1991 in Pomona.
     Wimmer is the heart of the movie, which depends for its success on
the success of his performance.  He succeeds beautifully.  I've never
seen CHINA BEACH, so I'm unfamiliar with his acting.  Here he's a kind,
sensitive, country boy, with slightly antiquated manners, but a
willingness to think the best of every situation.  He is a romantic and
a family man.  He not only is his wife's lover, but he is also the
utterly devoted father of his child.  His greatest loss is the loss of
decades with the two women he loves the most.  He speaks with a charming
down-home accent that makes him the personification of sincerity itself.
     The first half of the movie is the set-up, including a flash-back,
and the BTTF future shock of encountering 1991 without having the chance
to ease into it like the rest of us.  Richter has a wonderful talent for
making our own era look like the future to us, and it is this sequence,
which has a lot of comedy in it, that we experience odd little moments
right out of BLADERUNNER (very strange, totally ignored business going
on the background of the main actions), at least for me.  But if this is
the BACK TO THE FUTURE half, it lacks the extremism and gimmicky
desperation of those films, giving us instead a much more human plight,
even in a fantasy context (it's hard to remember that, as one character
remarks, "cryonics is a joke -- you can't freeze somebody like a piece
of hamburger").
     The second half is thematically and effectively quite a different
movie, the GHOST half, if you will, very romantic and not a little
weepy.  A feel good section, in which the main tension is not solving
crimes (they were solved decades before by the wife) but rather whether
the two lovers can bridge the missing years and get back together.
     It's this second half, particularly, which stands LATE FOR DINNER a
chance of being another spectacular sleeper success, like GHOST.  I've
seen the movie twice in one weekend and both audiences ate it up.
People were crying happily all over the auditorium.  It is sweet and
satisfying.
     And not only do we have an epic love story of sorts, but we have a
beautiful friendship between the brothers-in-law, a friendship where man
has to look out for and care for the other.  I am a sucker for this
particular story element, I have to confess.
     All the principals give first-rate performances.  The two men never
let up, as Lyndol remarked; their roles seem especially difficult and
they never lose their characters for a moment.  The two women get to
demonstrate less range -- basically they're limited to shock and denial.
Harden plays Joy, the long-abandoned wife who had to find her own way to
the Nineties; Flynn plays Jessica, the grown daughter, who has to help
ease her father back into her and her mother's lives.
     This is an odd movie and the oddest thing about it in a way is that
it works.  It surprises us over and over even at its romantic core; it
has a easy, low-key, kind of aw-shucks sense of humor; and it was some
winning performances.

Title
Review for Outremer (1990)
     OVERSEAS is a film by Brigitte Rouan, from a script by Rouan,
Philippe Le Guay, Christian Rullier, Cedric Kahn.  It stars Rouan,
Nicole Garcia, Marianne Basier, Philippe Galand, Yann Didet, Bruno
Todeschini.  Cinematography by Dominique Chapuis.  No rating, but
includes nudity.  In French with English subtitles.
     OVERSEAS is the story of three sisters living in French Algeria in
the period from after World War II until the return of de Gaulle to
power (and the imminent withdrawal of the French from Algeria).  The
story is told three times with each sister as the narrative focus each
time.  Each sister's reactions to the events around them is recorded:
one trapped by her provincialism and Catholicism has her sensuous
instincts blocked at every turn, and almost oblivious to the changes
happening around her; one is practical, but is pressured into marrying a
dreamer when she really wanted a strong man and winds up with one she
must protect from financial ruin and assassination; the third and
youngest is a volunteer nurse who crosses the line between the "colons" 
and the Algerian nationalists.
     Rouan as writer and director, ably assisted by cinematographer
Chapuis, controls and manipulates the three point-of-view stories deftly
and with great clarity, to say nothing of wit.  Each time we go through
a scene like the initial airplane landing we learn new details, see new
textures, understand more deeply what is really going on under the
surfaces and off in the shadows on the edges.  Rouan and Chapuis mix
naturalism with bold touches of near-Greenaway stylizations.
     Her achievement will make one think of Kurosawa's RASHOMON and the
novels of Virginia Woolf, but she keeps to her own vision and purpose in
exposing the injustices and beauty of Algeria's colonial past.  She
creates an indictment of and an homage to the *colons* and the
Algerians.
     I highly recommend this highly crafted, witty, ironic, and
insightful film at full price.  I hope you get a chance to see it.

Title
Review for Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
     If you have completely insulated yourself from the trailers and the
press in re TERMINATOR 2, you may discover a spoiler or two in the
following notice.  If you have picked up some clues already as to the
basic story, carry on; I reveal nothing you don't already know.)
     TERMINATOR 2 is a film by James Cameron, written by Cameron and
William Wisher.  It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Edward
Furlong, Robert Patrick, and Joe Morton.
     I have never seen the 1984 film TERMINATOR, so this review will not
be discussing the sequel in terms of the original, except to note that
the budget for original is said to be $6.5 million and for the sequel
$88 million.  Amazing inflation.  I think I can say that almost every
dollar of that 88 million is visible on the screen.  This is first, and
foremost, a F/X hit of major intensity.  The evolution from the friendly
tentacle of "polymerized water" in THE ABYSS to the demonic power of the
polymorphic, liquid-metal T-1000 is the evolution from a single
pictograph to a sophisticated vocabulary.  The T-1000, played with cool,
boy-next-door menace by Robert Patrick (who looks like a psycho escapee
from CHIPS with his lean, white-bread, bland good looks), is more living
metal than merely liquid metal; after all, mercury is a liquid metal and
although it used to be called quicksilver (as in "the quick and the
dead") it is nowheres near as determined to live and destroy as the
T-1000.
     Of course, it is the inevitable fate of super-villain-turned-
superhero T-800 (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger) that it must confront
a villain at least it's equal, just as Robocop came back to wrangle with
a better, evil version of itself.  Arnie, I understand, became the
enormously successful multi-national industry that he is today as a
direct result of TERMINATOR.  One need hardly say that he is perfect for
the part, which is custom tailored to both his physique and his dramatic
skills.  It is great fun having a hero who is every bit as villainous in
his demeanor and appearance as the real villain.  And for those of you
who know the original, it must be something of a mind-f*k to have the
T-800 reprogrammed to do good.
     It certainly is a shame that this detail is so well publicized in
advance by the trailers.  This has been discussed already, so I need not
rehash it here, except to agree with the poster who commented on the
terrific efforts the movie goes to set you up for a revelation that the
trailer gave away two months ago.
     But back to Arnie.  I like to have a certain amount of fun at
Arnie's expense; I don't get the impression that he thinks he's any
great shakes as a thespianic artiste.  But I do think that he does have
a flare for comedy, even if he can't read lines for anything.  A lot of
his comedy comes from the context of his usual screen persona: the
hulking monosyllabic muscle that walks like a man.  When this Hulk
smiles (half-smiles, actually) it's more exciting, and a lot funnier,
than when Garbo laughed.  Of course, he has his schticks which we love,
which we eagerly await: the lines, the shades.  It's obvious that people
love Arnie, and someone ought to seriously examine why.  I mean, if we
could bottle it, we'd all have $16 million airplanes, wouldn't we?
     And then there's Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor.  She struck me
very as Sigourney Weaver did in ALIEN and even more so in ALIENS.  She's
physically powerful, she's brave, she's seen the future, the enemy, and
it's left her more than a little obsessed.  I don't think Hamilton is as
drop-dead beautiful as Weaver, but she's impressive in her own way.  The
Connor character is fairly interesting in its own right.  She is a
crazy-person, desperate, driven, a monomaniac (to use an old-fashioned
word; as her son John (played by Edward Furlong) says, "One thing about
Mom, she believes in planning ahead."  (Quoted from memory.)  The only
thing she leaves out of the plan is her son's need to be loved.  Connor
has a recurring nightmare of a playground being nuked; it is the most
emotional, human moment and the most humane F/X, in what is largely a
very cold, mechanical movie.
     Edward Furlong as John Connor, future savior of mankind, is pretty
good; I liked him least when he was teaching the T-800 How to be a
Human.  He has a moral vision that balances and overrides the monomanias
of Mom and the Cyborg.  He is the krypton in some ways, the limitation
on the behavior of two rather determined killers.  Unfortunately, he is
little too glib in analyzing his problems to be the perfect valley brat,
but then he is a savior-in-training so I guess we can expect a little
extra horsepower in analysis department, too.
     Robert Patrick has the enviable role of being the vehicle for the
real star of TERMINATOR 2, the special effects and especially the
shape-shifting effects that make the T-1000 an ultimate demon.  Arnie
lays down the few rules that limit the shape-shifting early on, but
within those rules, watch out.  Patrick never sweats, but as a
shape-shifter he can imitate a smile.  The best stuff in TERMINATOR 2 is
reserved for Patrick's long-suffering but resilient screen body.  O
lucky man!  
     TERMINATOR 2 is a rowser of an action movie.  Absolutely nonstop,
sustained, one-long chase-cum-fight, with plenty of mind boggling
visuals along the way.  The Industrial Light and Magic people created
almost completely seamless effects; once or twice, I saw past the
illusion, but only for an instant.  The story is negligible, very
standard-issue, a rehash-cum-spin, as I understand it, of the original
TERMINATOR.  And, of course, the Message and the Medium are totally at
loggerheads.  The movies says "value human life", but the level of
violence is pretty intense and survivable only because in a comic-book
context.  I read that Cameron in the press kit admits this is "a violent
movie about peace."  Like f*king for virginity?
     But be that as it may, I enjoyed TERMINATOR 2.  The chances you
will, too, even at full ticket price.

Title
Review for Backdraft (1991)
     BACKDRAFT is a film by Ron Howard.  It stars Kurt Russell and
William Baldwin, with Robert DeNiro and Donald Sutherland.
     BACKDRAFT celebrates the heroism of firefighters, a subject seldom
addressed in films for some reason.  BACKDRAFT also celebrates the
beauty of fire with some the most breath-taking photography and special
effects I have ever seen.
     The real reason to see BACKDRAFT, in my humble opinion, is the
photography.  I had never seen fire until I saw it through the eyes of
this film.  And there are some eye-popping effects.  I read that
Lucasfilms' Industrial Light and Magic is responsible for some of the
effects, including models.  These must have been hellacious models
because they convinced me in a way I am seldom convinced.  I wish I had
the name of the person responsible for the fire photography here.  This
is an easy prediction for an Oscar.
     Alas, the rest of the film is a little more problematical.  Kurt
Russell is an irritating screen-presence and I wish he'd go away; except
for some remarkably well-developed jaw muscles I cannot think of thing
to recommend him.  BACKDRAFT lets him wallow in some major macho b.s.,
much of which is fortunately lost in the general noisiness of the film,
but more about that later.  William Baldwin is somewhat better, both as
a presence and as an actor, but even he cannot rise above the generally
inadequate script.
     The only actors who shine in BACKDRAFT are old pros in small parts.
Robert DeNiro is the arson investigator and as usual DeNiro threw
himself into his part, studying with a real inspector; DeNiro is one
actor who truly believes there are no small parts.  Donald Sutherland
does a wonderful arsonist, a part that invites comparison with Hannibal
Lecter in SILENCE OF THE LAMBS; where Hopkins nailed you with his eyes,
Sutherland chills you with a giggle.  The scenes with DeNiro and
Sutherland playing off each other are the best  acting scenes in the
movie.
     And forget about the women's parts.  They are strictly throw-aways
as the estranged wife and the girlfriend.  There are no women
firefighters in this superbutch world (and the black firefighters are
limited to silently admiring the principals).
     Really, the story, two brothers who find each other through the
ordeal of fire, is negligible, set-ups for the action sequences.  The
music, BTW, is dreadful, melodramatic and obvious, when you can hear it
over the noisy backgrounds.  Mostly it seems unnecessary.  Hey, I was
already excited, I didn't need musical clues.
     But, I enjoyed the film for what it had to offer.  As spectacle, as
eye-candy, it's well worth the price of a ticket.  Go and indulge
yourself.

Title
Review for Forever Young (1992)
     FOREVER YOUNG is a film directed by Steve Miner, from a script by
Jeffrey Abrams.  It stars Mel Gibson, Elijah Wood, Isabel Glasser,
George Wendt, and Jamie Lee Curtis.  Rated PG.
     FOREVER YOUNG is yet another reincarnation of the Rip Van Winkle
theme, of which we have recently had several examples of the cryogenic
type: ENCINO MAN, LATE FOR DINNER, to name two.  Hackneyed as the
concept is, FOREVER YOUNG manages to be fresh and interesting because of
the interesting performances by Mel Gibson and the other members of the
cast.  Unfortunately, the director and writer made a couple of egregious
mistakes in visualizing how a sleeper adapts to a changed world and how
a person ages.
     The best thing about FOREVER YOUNG is Mel Gibson.  This is probably
the romantic story that a lot of his fans have been waiting for.  His
acting is easy and natural, more impressive than the somewhat forced "I
am an actor" approach to last year's HAMLET.  The special charm he
brings is the antiquated courtliness of a man from a half-century ago.
His shock when he hears a respectable, single mother curse and casually
discuss her lovers speaks volumes to establish his character and his
fish-out-of-water situation.  He is simply perfect in the part of the
resuscitated test pilot searching for his past "across oceans of time,"
to borrow a phrase from another movie that might stand as the dark side
of this one.
     Gibson is supported by a first-rate cast.  Elijah Wood is the
fatherless boy who finds Gibson and wants to keep him with a desperation
that is nearly palpable.  Jamie Lee Curtis plays the mother who
befriends this strange stranger and who would like to be more than just
friends.  Gibson's friend who originally puts him on hold is played by
George Wendt (of TV's "Cheers"); it is somewhat disappointing that we
don't see more of Wendt than we do.  Isabel Glasser is Gibson's love in
the 1939 sequence in an promising debut.
     And, yes, Mel Gibson shares his well-regarded butt with us for a
brief shot, tastefully half-lit.  Brief, but memorable.
     There are inconsistency problems when Gibson wakes up to 1992.
Push-button phones don't throw him, but answering machines do.  There is
the fact that, numerous Dracula movies notwithstanding, if a person were
to suddenly age, his or her hair would not turn gray from the tips back
to root, nor would it happen faster than hair can grow.  Likewise, with
the rest of geriatric makeup, it's well done -- Oscar material, really
-- but wholly impossible.  In a Dracula movie, this is not a problem.
In a romantic film, much more grounded in our quotidian world, it is a
problem.  And leave us disregard out of charity the whole issue of
Gibson's freezing and resuscitation -- fun scenes, but slightly
insulting to anyone prepared to give it a minute's thought.  LATE FOR
DINNER was better on all these counts; unfortunately, LATE FOR DINNER
did not have the star power of Gibson or his butt and so never attracted
the audience it deserved.
     FOREVER YOUNG, on the other hand, could very well attract a large
following.  It is, despite playing fast and loose with laws of
thermodynamics inter alia, an excellent entertainment: a romantic
fantasy, just torrid enough to melt even this reviewer.
     I can recommend FOREVER YOUNG to you, even at full prices, but go
to a cheap matinee if you can.

Title
Review for Delusion (1991)
     DELUSION is a film written and directed by Carl Colpaert, written
by Colpaert and Kurt Voss, photographed by Geza Sinkovics, with music by
Barry Adamson.  It stars Jim Metzler, Kyle Secor, and Jennifer Rubin,
with Jerry Orbach.  Rated R, contains the f-word, some violence, and
naked female breasts.
     DELUSION is a handsome and interesting thriller, a kind of hommage
to the B's.  Jim Metzler plays the computer exec (George) who witnesses
a car wreck in the Nevada desert and offers a ride to Chevy and Patti
(Kyle Secor and Jennifer Rubin) who fall out of the overtuned car and
into George's life.
     Everyone is profoundly changed by this act of common kindness, as
is the finest B tradition.  George and Chevy have their own agendas, but
Patti remains a cypher, the wildcard, the only free agent.  George asks
her whose side she was on; she answers in a swallowed whisper, "I'm on
my own side."  
     Lyndol and I disagree on Patti.  He sees her as another unrealized
female character, with no past, no future, a void filled only by the
male characters around her.  I say her character is unformed at the
beginning, that we learn little about her past, but we do know she's
going to have a future quite independently of any other character.
Certainly, she's the most interesting of the three principals as a human
beings.
     As an example of the over-the-top, David-Lynch extremist character,
Kyle Secor's Chevy is pretty darn flashy and a delight to watch, but not
human in any way that this human chooses to acknowledge.  In some ways,
Jim Metzler got the hardest job playing the victim that no one should
want to root for.  Men in general do not come off very attractively in
this film, although I don't think of them as being bashed, merely
realistically treated, certainly not to the extent that one feels a
little bad about a man after seeing THELMA AND LOUISE.
     As with virtually all the films I am really drawn to, this one
features some minor character performances that nearly steal the show.
Jerry Orbach does an admirable turn, first jokingly speaking of the
advantages of being dead and then seeing something of the fallacies of
this argument.  Another actor, whose name I don't have here, has a short
scene in a Las Vegas suite, a dance scene with Chevy and a bimbo, that
is sure to remain one of the lasting memories I will have of DELUSION.
     The cinematography is excellent, making the skeletonically
beautiful desert a character in the film.  Sinkovics has a way of making
the desert gleam, even while avoiding most of the cliches of desert
movies.  I'm told the score is spare, but charged (I'm pretty much tone
deaf).
     This is a film about ambiguities and priorities.  What's clear,
what important.  The ending is going to please some, irritate some,
puzzle others, but it will give you something to talk about over your
coffees afterwards.
     I recommend DELUSION even at full prices.  I do not expect the film
to be shown much outside the arthouse circuit, but if you can, do go see
it.

Title
Review for Mariachi, El (1992)
     EL MARIACHI is written and directed by Robert Rodriguez. It stars
Carlos Gallardo, Consuelo Gomez, and Peter Marquardt.  In Spanish, with
English subtitles. Rated R, due to violence.
     EL MARIACHI is not a great film, but it is a remarkable one, and
it may be the harbinger of an important new filmmaker.  The filmmaker
is Robert Rodriguez, an Austin, Texas, writer-director. His plan was to
make EL MARIACHI on the cheap, sell it to the Mexican video market,
take the profits and make two more Spanish-language films which he
could parlay into a slightly larger English-language film, and then
break into Hollywood. To raise part of the $7,000 he budgeted for his
first film, he volunteered for a drug experiment at his school, the
University of Texas, Austin; four weeks later he had $3,000, a script,
and one of his actors, Peter Marquardt (who would play the gringo drug
lord). He and his co-producer and star, Carlos Gallardo, shot the film
in a week, using mostly local townsfolk in a border town, Cd. Acuna,
Coahuila. For dolly shots, Gallardo pushed Rodriguez in a borrowed
wheelchair as Rodriguez shot with a borrowed camera. He filmed in 16-mm
and edited in video. He inserted footage of a mostly inert pit bull
whenever the narrative was out of synch with the film.
     His film style appears to be modeled on the Coen brothers, or
perhaps satirizing it: violent subject matter, some black humor, fast
camera movements, fish-eye distortions, and speeded-up action
sequences. As for a moral center, the film is a more than a little
tentative. This is not Peckinpah, not yet at least, but the mariachi of
the title does have a sense of who he meant to be and who he became
instead. But mostly this is an action film that puts its energy into
being energetic. Still the characters, especially the mariachi and the
woman bar-owner he falls in with are interesting characters, credible
and likable. The plot, the characters, the editing, the use of music,
the direction, and the inventiveness in the face of a nearly cash-free
production are worthy of our attention.
     Rodriguez' plan, by the way, went somewhat awry when EL MARIACHI
unexpectedly attracted a studio bidding war. When the dust settled,
Columbia had agreed to distribute the film to twenty U.S. cities in
Spanish with English subtitles and signed Rodriguez to work on a $5
million or $6 million remake (or sequel -- I've read both).
     Admittedly, EL MARIACHI has a freak-show element to it -- not
unlike Dr. Johnson's crack about the woman preacher ("The wonder, sir,
is not that she preach well, but that she preach at all") -- but there
is something under the student razzle-dazzle and the gee-whiz appeal of
the story of the film's making that attracts me, entertains me, and
makes me hope for more miracles from Robert Rodriguez.
     If EL MARIACHI plays near you, I highly recommend you see it, even
at full ticket price.

Title
Review for Honeymoon in Vegas (1992)
     HONEYMOON IN VEGAS is a film directed and written by Andrew
Bergman.  It stars James Caan, Nicolas Cage, Sarah Jessica Parker, with
Pat Morita and Ann Bancroft.  Rated PG-13, for sexual situations.
     HONEYMOON IN VEGAS is a romantic comedy with an excellent cast and
a first-rate director-writer.  Andrew Bergman was once called by New
York magazine "The Unknown King of Comedy" for writing some very funny
comedies, such as BLAZING SADDLES, THE IN-LAWS, and SOAP DISH, inter
alia.  In 1981 he stubbed his toe directing SO FINE, but in 1990 he did
the wonderful THE FRESHMAN, a much neglected and underappreciated gem
that starred Matthew Broderick and Marlon Brando (in one of the boldest
and bravest self-parodies I have ever seen).
     Then we've got the considerable talents of the cast.  James Caan,
looking slim and healthy, an actor who broke my heart by being brilliant
in THE GAMBLER and then pissing away his career for years, is perfect as
the charming, vicious gambler.  Nicolas Cage, mercifully minus his most
mannered affections, is the straight man and plays it without a single
wink at the camera.  Sarah Jessica Parker, who impressed a lot of people
in last year's L.A. STORY as the spacy, hyper-kinetic beach girl,
SanDeE, is a lot smarter here, but still the slightly dense, slightly
innocent love interest of Caan and Cage.
     The situation -- a boobish everyman caught up in the wiles of a
gangster and an increasingly absurd solution -- is familiar Bergman
territory.  As if the basic situation were not absurd enough, Bergman
goes over the line with a running joke about Elvis impersonators that
culminates in a scene so full of plot holes and so unlikely as to
qualify as a contemporary version of the deus ex machina who has solved
so many dramatic and comedic situations throughout the history of
theater.  There is also a problem with way Bergman handles his villain,
Caan's Tommy the gambler.  He sets him up as a sympathetic, if
unprincipled, character, not unlike Brando's Godfather parody, and then
in the last ten minutes turns Tommy into the blackest and most vile of
men, destroying the dynamic and ambiguity that had made the rest of film
complex and interesting.
     I recommend HONEYMOON IN VEGAS for its virtues and for its
interesting flaws, but you should go to a discount matinee to see them
and it.

Title
Review for Silence of the Lambs, The (1991)
     THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS is Jonathan Demme's adaptation of a novel
by Thomas Harris and it knocked my socks off.
     It is a thriller about serial killers, one known and in
high-security detention, one unknown and on a bloody rampage.  The
former is played by Anthony Hopkins, who has created the creepiest, most
disturbing villain I have ever seen in a movie.  He is totally
convincing as "Hannibal the Cannibal," alarming, charming and vile,
intelligent, perceptive, a human animal.  If Hopkins doesn't get a
best-actor nomination next year, it will be because the film was
released too early in the year, although how anyone who sees his
performance can ever forget it is beyond me.
     He forms a bizarre alliance with an FBI agent-in-training played by
Jodie Foster.  Foster turns in an excellent performance that ought to
establish her as a creditable adult actor.  Her performance isn't as
flashy as Hopkins, but it's thorough and convincing throughout.
     I have only one cavil: the other, on-the-loose killer is a gay man.
Okay, there are probably a proportionate number of gay people among
killers and psychopaths as in the world at large.  But I can see no
particular reason why this one has to be gay.  Because he thinks he's a
transsexual the film seems to say.  Hogwash!  I think the real reason is
that a stereotype and a prejudice is being exploited and I say shame on
Demme and company.
     One of the things I like about SILENCE is the way the film plays
with who are good guys and who are bad guys.  Hopkins, for instance, is
presented as exactly what he is and yet at the end we like him, knowing
full well the evil he does.  Another character, who is on the right side
of the bars, the director of the asylum where Hopkins is kept, is
clearly marked from the beginning as a villain and we cheer his final
fate.  The other killer, "Buffalo Bill," is presented without any
ambiguity--all bad, but interesting.
     There are consistently good characterizations of the major players,
all too rare a quality in contemporary scripts.  In particular, we learn
a lot about Foster's character--even though she is a woman, contrary to
such movies as THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS and RUSSIA HOUSE.  Also, I was
pleased that no one had to fall in love with anyone else, although two
intriguing friendships develop for Foster.
     The film is ably photographed without particularly drawing attention
to itself or making any obvious contribution to the meaning of the film,
unlike a film such as L.A. STORY where the camera's love affair with Los
Angeles is a substantial part of the film.
     One WARNING: this film is a very tense affair with blood, violence,
and mutilation.  Most of the worst happens out of the range of the
camera, but enough is shown and the rest talked about so it may disturb
some viewers excessively.  Several people in my audience clearly
couldn't take it any more and exited after one particularly grueling
scene.  There is also strong language and some nudity.

Title
Review for Kafka (1991)
     KAFKA is a film by Steven Soderburgh with a screenplay written by
Lem Dobbs.  The film stars Jeremy Irons, Theresa Russell, Joel Gray, Ian
Holm, Alec Guinness, Jeroen Krabbe, Armin Mueller-Stahl.  Rated PG-13
for brief violence, mature themes.
     KAFKA is the brilliant follow-up to Steven Soderburgh's debut film
SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE.  It is like its predecessor only insofar as it
too is a chance-taker, a long-shot project, this time based on a
ten-year-old script by Lem Dobbs (THE HARD WAY).  It is also a film that
is inevitably going to be compared both to Terry Gilliam's BRAZIL and
David Cronenberg's NAKED LUNCH; however, the other film that I was
reminded of, and which almost certainly influenced Soderburgh, was THE
WIZARD OF OZ.  More about this later, however.
     First, you should clearly understand that the conceit of KAFKA is
like that of the film HAMMETT, namely that a famous author in the days
before his fame becomes involved in a situation that is a pastiche of
his most famous, or most typical, works.  In the course of the story,
the necessarily literate viewer is invited to pick out references to the
author's stories.  In HAMMETT, for example, the title character has
table lamp the base of which looks just like the black Maltese falcon in
the Bogey movie.  In KAFKA, there are references to "Metamorphosis,"
"The Trial," "The Castle," at a minimum.  However, this is a fantasy on
the theme of Kafka, not a biopic, not film version of a Kafka story, and
it is most certainly not that tired old cliche Kafkaesque, and it sure
as heck ain't Merchant and Ivory quaint.
     Instead, what we have is Jeremy Irons is a wonderful performance.
Of course, Irons is one of our very best film actors, but it is always
surprising to be once again reminded of his range and versatility.  Some
critics think the Irons is merely walking through the role, but I think
they are underestimating how much skill is involved in the kind of
nervous, intense, withdrawn-from-life characterization with which Irons
delineates his Kafka.
     Irons is supported by an amazing cast: Theresa Russell as Gabriela,
the seductive revolutionary; Joel Gray as the office-messenger Burgel,
who seems to have a lot more power than your average messenger ("Aha!
Away from your section, without cause!"); Alec Guinness as the Chief
Clerk, who advises Kafka "You should find a more athletic hobby -- put
some color in your cheeks"; Armin Stahl-Mueller (lately in Barry
Levinson's AVALON) as Inspector Grubach; the slapstick team of Ludwig
and Oscar (Keith Allen and Simon McBurney) who are assigned to be
Kafka's assistants at the soul-killing Accident and Insurance
Compensation Association where he's been clerking for nearly nine years.
About his job, he asks a co-worker: "You've never felt it was a horrible
double life from which there was no escape but insanity?"  And then
there's Ian Holm as Dr. Murnau, the name being a sly reference to the
legendary German director F. W. Murnau.  Not to forget, Jeroen Krabbe as
the stonecutter who admires Kafka's writing and who supplies clues to
the Castle that dominates the storyline as it does the skyline of
Prague.
     Dobbs has complained that Soderburgh mangled his script, but
whatever the truth the fact that remains that filmed script does an
elegant and intelligent job of drawing on Kafka's life and works to make
its absurdist points, at least until it detours into horror-movie mode.
It is in this part of the movie that Soderburgh invites comparison, and
a pale one, with BRAZIL.  However, a more favorable comparison of the
two movies would mention the sly and sometimes hilarious humor of much
of the absurdism, especially Kafka's lines.
     Just as witty at times are the photography and sets.  Soderburgh
and his cinematographer Walt Lloyd make superb use of the Prague
locations.  Most of the film is shot in black and white.  Some of this
actually started my heart racing with its beauty.  The section of the
story transpiring inside the Castle is shot in color, and Kafka's entry
into this world of color, horror, and surreality has got to be modeled
on the moment Dorothy opens the door of the house and reveals
Munchkinland.  The color is what I (in my lamentable ignorance of film
technology) think of as supersaturated like what I believe is called the
three-strip color of old Technicolor, that unnaturally rich, jewel-like,
painterly color of Errol Flynn's ROBIN HOOD, especially.
     The fantasy reaches its climax in this color sequence, but when
Kafka returns to the black and white world of Prague outside the Castle
there is a new look of unreality to this "real" world.  I don't know if
it was just me, or if the cinematography was different in the last
b-and-w segment than in the first, maybe focused slightly differently.
But I had the same reaction when Dorothy wakes up back in Kansas: those
people are quite as real; Kansas isn't quite as real as Oz.  Once you've
been vouchsafed a vision, the quotidian world is changed forever.
Certainly Kafka's character is different in the last morgue scene than
in the comparable scene earlier in the movie.
     Have I told you I loved Steven Soderburgh's KAFKA?  See this film,
do yourself a real treat.  It may not, as some critics say, have the
"lyrical perfection of SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE" (Michael Upchurch,
Seattle Times), but it is a stunning performance both by this still new
director and his wonderful cast.  KAFKA will certainly achieve some kind
of cult status, for good or ill, and it will certainly be paired in
revival houses with NAKED LUNCH, with which KAFKA shares some creative
sensibilities and motives.  But see it now while it's still a fresh,
invigorating, stand-alone experience.  And the cost be hanged.

Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
     ALADDIN is an animated film from the Walt Disney Pictures.  It
features the voice of Robin Williams.  Music by Alan Menken, with lyrics
by Howard Ashman and Tim Rice.  Rated G, suitable for all audiences.
     ALADDIN, which ought to be called GENIE, is more properly a remake
of THE THIEF OF BAGHDAD than a telling of the story of Aladdin.  (I
wonder who here has seen Tim Burton's ALADDIN AND HIS WONDERFUL LAMP,
which he made for "Faerie Tale Theatre," with Valerie Bertinelli, Robert
Carradine, Leonard Nimoy, and James Earl Jones?)  THE THIEF has been
made four previous times, including one of the greatest of all silent
films with Douglas Fairbanks, Sr., and directed by Raoul Walsh; others
are the 1940 special-effects extravaganza with Sabu, music by Miklos
Rozsa, directed by Ludwig Berger, as well two newer and more dismissible
versions (one with Steve Reeves, the other made for television with
Peter Ustinov as the king along with Roddy McDowell, Terence Stamp,
Frank Finley, and Ian Holm).
     The Disney version is totally dominated by two entirely different
forces, Robin Williams and computer animation.  Undoubtedly the great
achievement of ALADDIN is yoking these two disparate elements into one
seamless whole.  The other elements of a big animated Disney musical, in
the manner of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and THE LITTLE MERMAID, at least, are
unfortunately either lacking or sadly diminished in this film.
     For one thing, the music is quite dismissible.  There are no really
memorable songs.  The best number is a high-speed patter
song-cum-production-number sung by Robin Williams's Genie.  Nothing can
compare with the score of MERMAID, where the only problem was the small
number of songs (compared to a live musical).  Nothing can compare with
individual songs from BEAUTY, either, like Mrs. Potts singing the title
song.  Alan Menken's lyricist Howard Ashman died of AIDS while working
on the ALADDIN score, and Menken's new collaborator, Tim Rice (who had
previously collaborated with Andrew Lloyd Weber), no doubt was given a
nearly impossible job to do.  The results are forgettable, and I doubt
the score will get an Oscar nomination, as did those of the previous two
Disney musicals.
     For another, the story line is skewed away from developing an
interesting human character, especially in the form of Beauty, in favor
of Genie's pyrotechnics.  This results in a less resonant, less
universal quality, and reduces the value of the film to the value one
brings to Williams's unique talents.  Neither the Thief nor the Princess
can hold our interest on his or her own.  The villain, the sorcerous
Vizier, his parrot-familiar, and the bemused little king provide
entertainment value, but not much in the way of human elements.
     So what about Robin Williams's Genie?  Nothing much, except his
performance is the core of the film, the only real reason to see it (and
resee it).  It is a marvel of breath-taking free association, of verbal
shape-shifting, and of a distinctly un-Disney sense of humor.
Everything about Genie reminds one more of the Warner Bros.  Looney
Tunes that were constantly tweaking Disneyesque pretensions to high art.
But in addition, Genie and his treatment also put me in mind the
distinctly hallucinatory quality of some of Disney's most interesting
films, such as THE THREE CABALLEROS, parts of FANTASIA, or even ALICE IN
WONDERLAND.  Genie is more alive, more intriguing, than any merely human
character, and Robin Williams finds himself in the character.  The fact
that the animators could visualize the free-form flow of Williams's mind
is a tribute to their skills and to their willingness to take chances in
a very un-Disneyesque way.
     All of us computer geeks will be fascinated to see the computer
animation used here.  I think that it must be more extensive, and better
integrated, here in either of the two previous musicals.  Instead of one
or two set pieces, such as the chandelier and ballroom in BEAUTY, we
have here computer animation in virtually every sequence; we have
swooping rides on the magic carpet, we have the streets and alleys of
Aqaba and the palace itself, we have a rolling cylinder, and a lot more.
I look forward to the day when I won't be able to spot computer
animation, and quite possibly that day has already come in some scenes
and effects, but not in all.  It still has a tendency to draw attention
to itself, to look cold and mechanical, if I may so inexactly
characterize the look.  It allows animators to do things that they would
not attempt otherwise, and for that I am grateful; but still one does
look forward to day when it not so distractingly clever and
self-apparent.
     In general, ALADDIN was not the success BEAUTY was, but it still
has powers and attractions and entertainment values that more than
justify a matinee ticket.  Remember that there will lots of kids in the
audience and be patient.  Once the movie starts you will hardly hear a
peep from them.  And of course, if you are a parent, this is your chance
to get out of the house and not have a qualm.  The kids will like it and
you will like it.

Title
Review for Quigley Down Under (1990)
     QUIGLEY DOWN UNDER has Tom Selleck doing a Western, except in this
case it's Western Australia, supposedly.  Actually, it appears from the
credits that most of the movie was shot in Northern Territory.  But none
of that is obvious to most Americans, for whom this movie was made.
     Now I have to say I like Tom Selleck, he's handsome and easy on the
eye.  He can speak his lines in a reasonable sort of a way (unlike, say,
Arnold Schwarzenegger).  I've seen all of Tom's movies (pardon the
familiarity of a fan) and he has certainly made some worse ones than
this.  
     It's action, adventure, revenge, justice for the Aborigines, a
crazy woman, a wonderfully despicable heavy.  It's astonishing scenery.
(As Douglas Adams might have said, "Australia is big, mind-bogglingly
big, etc.")
     What I like about the film include the villain, the scenery, the
Aborigines, Tom, and (after we know why she's crazy) the woman.
     What I don't like is the second-hand big-screen Western movie music
which overplays every scene.  There is even this banjo piece which made
me think we had slipped through a wormhole and landed in New Orleans.
     The movie could have been a lot more Australian and a lot less of a
transplanted American western.

Title
Review for Adjuster, The (1991)
     THE ADJUSTER is a Canadian film directed and written by Atom
Egoyan.  It stars Elias Koteas, Arsinee Khanjian, Maury Chaykin, and
Gabrielle Rose.  It is rated R for sexual situations.
     THE ADJUSTER has moved from the recent Seattle International Film
Festival to a theatrical run in this town.  By all reports it was one of
the successes of the Festival.  Atom Egoyan is the Armenian-Canadian
director of FAMILY VIEWING and SPEAKING PARTS.  This new film is being
marketed as a black comedy.  Don't you believe it!  It is a serious
movie about values, seeking values, defining values, putting the price
on values, as it were.  In doing this, Egoyan weaves together three
stories, each one of which out-Lynches David Lynch at every turn for
bizarre situations and unlikely plot turns.  This is a strange,
ambiguous movie never goes out of its way to explain itself, but I doubt
you will find much that is comedic about it, even though it is witty and
canny as hell.  You will likely find it fascinating and surprising right
to the end.
     Elias Koteas plays Noah Render, the insurance adjuster who devotes
himself utterly and compulsively to the needs of his clients, who all
seem to be victims of fires.  He takes charge of their lives while they
are in the bureaucratic limbo of waiting to get their claims processed.
He puts them up in the same motel, he visits them daily, he even sleep
with them if that's what they need.  Amy Taubin in the Village Voice
calls him a "compassion junkie", which pretty much says it.  Of course,
what an insurance adjuster does is determine the value of what is lost.
His fallacy is thinking that what is lost can be regained, but he
determinedly tries to put a value on everything, even in coito.
     He lives in a model home in a bankrupt housing development that
otherwise consists of scalped ground and signs showing the house that
will never be built there.  He shares this house with Hera, her
Armenian-speaking sister, and Hera's young son.  You might think you
understand the relationships here, but there's a chance you're wrong.
     Hera, played by Arsinee Khanjian, is a censor.  She spends her days
viewing apparently horrific pornographic films and classifying the ways
each violates some code of moral values.  Her sister has taken an
interest in her work, too.
     Then there is the story of Bubba and Mimi (played by Maury Chaykin
and Gabrielle Rose, respectively).  Was Bubba a filthy street person
Mimi assaults on the subway, or is it one of her elaborate, kinky
fantasies?  As Bubba explains later, "They have everything, or at least
the means to have everything, they want, but they don't know what they
need, so they try different things."  Their ultimate try-out results in,
inter alia, uniting the three threads of the film.
     THE ADJUSTER gets off to one of those starts where you think the
film is never going to let you in on its secrets, but it does at its own
pace.  I think the pace could have been tighter, but that's just about
my only cavil.  The pacing problem is a problem at all because the
characters are all so emotionally dead; most of the time they brood.
Bubba and Mimi are pretty lively, but even Bubba can express himself
only with pauses you could drive a Mack truck through.  The actors are
uniformly excellent.
     I can cheerfully recommend THE ADJUSTER to any fan of Egoyan or Wim
Wenders, whose style makes similar demands of the viewer.  It is an odd
movie, but a uniquely satisfying one, one you will think and talk about
some time to come.

Title
Review for Pope Must Die, The (1991)
     THE POPE MUST DIE is film by Peter Richardson, written by Peter
Richardson and Pete Richens.  It stars Robbie Coltrane, Beverly
D'Angelo, Herbert Lom, Alex Rocco, Peter Richardson.  "Rated R for
irreverence."
     THE POPE MUST DIE is a British film that opened to solid box-office
in early June in London and is still playing in Britain, where it was
among the top-grossing films last month.  This is one more reason to
think that the British think Catholicism is pretty funny stuff, which I
can only assume is what's carrying the film.  I don't think the humor is
translating very well to American audiences.  Instead, over here we're
getting a rather bogus first-amendment controversy to fan ticket sales.
Lots of papers in this country have either refused to carry Miramax's
advertising or have edited the title in the ads down to "The Pope Must ...!"
     The film is a satiric fantasy about a rather failed priest, Dave
Albinizi, who gets elected Pope as the result of a clerical error
instead of a photogenic and phony Cardinal Albini, the favorite son of
corruption in the Vatican.  The story derives, as did the story in
GODFATHER PART III, from the Banco Ambrosiano scandal that rocked the
Vatican some years back.
     Robbie Coltrane plays Dave Albinizi with his usually cuddly-cute
adroitness.  Certainly, Coltrane is a major reason to sit through the
problem-ridden production.  However, his NUNS ON THE RUN was both
funnier and a more effective vehicle for satirizing the Church.  The
supporting players provide some further richness.  Alex Rocco as the
Cardinal who talked like a Hollywood agent and carried a cruciform
cellular phone gets in some fine business.  Paul Bartel as the swishy
Monsignor Vitchie is positively queenly.  Herbert Lom does Vittorio
Correlli, the godfather behind the machinations, to a turn until we get
about two-thirds of the way through the film.  He loses his edge just as
the script goes ballistic and loses all its control, too.  The woman who
plays Correlli's daughter does a well-deserved send-up of the
unfortunate Sophia Coppola.  There's also worthy of mention the
nun-from-hell role from Annette Crosby.  Finally, director Peter
Richardson provides an attractive, if not particularly dynamic, part as
the only honest man in the Vatican.
     One of the Seattle reviewers suggested that if Richardson had spent
more time directing the movie and less time directing himself, we would
have all benefited.  Despite the excellent character actors, despite
Beverly D'Angel's rather late appearance, and especially despite the
cloying appearance of Salvatore Cascio, the too cute kid from CINEMA
PARADISO (the movie I love to hate), there is no here here.  No story
that holds together, no vision, no conviction, no fire, certainly not
the anti-rational anarchy of the Python gang.  The movie is flat, flat,
flat.  There is no cinematography or score worth mentioning.  The pacing
is arrhythmic, but a certain boon for the refreshment counter.
     It's true Richardson gets in a couple well placed kicks at both CNN
and BBC.  The Vatican exercise video with the chorus line of idiotically
smiling priests ("Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John/Work that fat until it's
gone") is pretty fine.  However, it ain't enough.
     I cannot recommend this movie, even at matinee prices.  Maybe as a
$1.98 rental next winter, but only if it's one of those nights.

Title
Review for Hear My Song (1991)
     HEAR MY SONG is a movie directed by Peter Chelsom.  It was written
by Peter Chelsom and Adrian Dunbar.  It stars Ned Beatty, Adrian Dunbar,
Cathleen Doyle, Tara Fitzgerald,  William Hootkins, David McCallum, and
Shirley-Anne Field.  It is rated R for brief nudity, mild profanity.
     HEAR MY SONG is an Irish (or possibly Anglo-Irish? [actually, it's
British -mod]) film that is fresh, charming, funny, sweet, and
entertaining.  The fact that the story is less than original and holds
few, if any, surprises, barely diminishes the appeal of this
light-hearted romantic comedy about friendship, loyalty, and
obligations that must be paid.
     The major character is Mickey O'Neill, played effortlessly and
energetically by co-writer Adrian Dunbar.  He is operating a slightly
bogus night club in an Irish neighborhood of an English city, which
logically ought to be Liverpool.  His schemes catch up with him and he
looses everything, especially his girl and his reputation.  To redeem
himself in the eyes of his community and especially those of his girl
(Tara Fitzgerald) and her mother (Shirley-Ann Field), the still
beautiful Miss Dairy Goodness of 1958, Mickey heads for Ireland to track
the one man who can make Mickey persona grata, a legendary Irish tenor
and tax evader, Josef Locke.  (It seems, by the way, that Locke is a real
person, who is living peacefully and legally in Ireland today.)
     In the film, Locke is played commandingly by veteran American
character actor Ned Beatty.  Beatty backs off from a full-flown Irish
accent, and what he does assay may slip a trifle from time to time.  But
the performance is fine enough to overlook an occasional lapsus linguae.
(I'd be interested in hearing from any Irish about this or any other
reaction to the film.)  The only problem I have with Beatty's
performance is in the area of dubbing the songs.  The singing is
provided by tenor Vernon Midgley, and it is really wonderful to hear it.
However, I never can believe it is coming out of Ned Beatty's all-too
familiar face.
     There is a wealth of charming character performances in HEAR MY
SONG.  And the location shots of Irish landscapes are an added
attraction.  There's a lovely friendship story concerning Mickey and his
boyhood friend Fenton (played by a singularly cute and charming actor
whose name, alas, I do not have).  Mickey says as they part, "What have
I done for you?"  To which Fenton replies, "Nothing.  But's that not the
point."  There is also a very funny performance by William Hootkins, a
man who tries to make people happy by being what they want him to be.
     The humor of the film is founded on desperation and the fear of
losing one's honor.  Mickey is desperate to get back his girl, the girl
he was never able to say "I love you" to; Locke has to redeem his
promises to the girl's mother.  And then there's a police inspector
played by David McCallum (best known for his role in THE MAN FROM
U.N.C.L.E. as Ilya Kuriakin), who's been waiting for twenty-five years
to redeem his promise to arrest the tax invader who saved his life.
There are plenty of outrageous gags, handled with style and grace, none
more so than one concerning a cow and a very deep well.
     I can recommend HEAR MY SONG to just about anyone who isn't holed
in WAYNE'S WORLD and has no intention being so (that's my minireview of
that one; please do not write to tell me what a geek I am--I happen to
be an old fart), but I digress.  If you pay full price, you will not
feel cheated.  In the U.S. it is being distributed by Miramax,
something you might want to mention to your local art house manager.
This is a charmer.

Title
Review for Soapdish (1991)
     SOAPDISH is a film starring Sally Fields, Kevin Kline, Robert
Downey, Jr., Cathy Moriarty, and Whoopi Goldberg.  Elizabeth Shue also
has a major role, but doesn't get mentioned in the display ads.
     SOAPDISH is a very funny movie, a farce that understands perfectly
the weirdness of the soap opera, the "continuing daytime drama" as the
TV guys like to put it, and understands equally well that people like
their soaps.  It exploits this weirdness until I was howling, yet never
makes itself superior to the genre.  It satirizes without patronizing
and it works wonderfully well.  There is hardly a mean bubble in this
soap.
     Sally Fields is not my favorite actor.  The last time I liked her
ditzy energy was in that movie about stand-up comics, the one that
everyone else in world loathed and abominated apparently.  SOAPDISH
makes me a fan; she is perfect as the aging queen of the soaps,
"America's sweetheart," whose professional and personal lives are
coming apart.  Her live-in boyfriend goes back to his wife; her producer
and one of her co-stars (Cathy Moriarty) are plotting to push her out of
her long-running soap.  A demon (Kevin Kline) from the past shows up in
both her worlds unwelcome and unbidden.  Her misery is perfect,
comically exaggerated and intense, agonizingly funny, just as her
vulnerability and desperation make her human and appealing.  We laugh
ourselves silly at her expense, but we never dislike her.  This seems to
be exactly what is missing from most Hollywood comedies these days; does
anyone *like* John Candy, par exemple?
     Kevin Kline can do no wrong, as far as I'm concerned.  He's not so
driven here as he was in A FISH CALLED WANDA, but instead he's a lot
more human.  When we first meet him, in a geriatric dinner theater in
Florida, playing Willy Loman, we know that he can relate to his role.
He is an excellent foil to Fields' craziness, more in control but just
as desperate, just as determined to win through, and just as funny.
     Robert Downey, Jr., and Cathy Moriarty are the conspirators, the
heavies, he driven by his lust for Montana (Moriarty), she driven by her
need to be the queen of the soaps.  Downey is really quite wonderful
here, his timing, delivery giving his part a kind of snappy hilarity
that makes him appealing and adorable in a sleazy way.  Moriarty is
strange; about her I can't say too much without talking about plot,
something I try to avoid in these notices.  Leave us say merely that she
makes a major contribution to the hilarity.
     Whoopi Goldberg is Fields's head writer and only friend.  She looks
wonderful in her slightly wacky outfits.  She is the only
straight-thinking, honorable person is the soapy world of ratings and
rivalries.  She has her funny moments, but her major role is that of
second banana to Fields, something Goldberg carries off with surprising
skill considering her own enormous comedic skills.
     Elizabeth Shue plays the newcomer who throws everyone's lives and
plots into the trashcan.  This role has to be a boost in her somewhat
floundering career; after all, I don't think she's carried a movie since
ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING, in which she sang the memorable "Babysitter's
Blues."  She looks good, she acts well, she's a more than competent
comedienne.  Since I'm expecting SOAPDISH to be a major money machine, I
think Shue's name will in all likelihood be moving up above the title
one of these days soon.
     This is a very funny movie that achieves its high level of hilarity
through a combination of sight gags, sexual humor, farce, satire, and a
respect for the audience that is extremely rare and successful.

Title
Review for Eating (1990)
     EATING is a film by Henry Jaglom and features 38 women including
Frances Bergen, mother of Candace, widow of Edgar, and survivor of the
Edgar McCarthy wars, as the voice of sanity and nonunderstanding.
     Henry Jaglom is one of the world's great film makers and EATING is
the best film he's ever made.  Okay, so sue me, but that's my opinion
and I'll stick to it.  If for no other reason than that Jaglom is the
only man, woman, or child making movies today who has made a movie about
me.  I am obese, have been all my life, and, while I'm not a woman, I
can relate.  Boy! can I relate.  I mention this because I may be a
shade prejudiced as I attempt to review this film for you.  Forewarned
and all that.
     Bergen (I think) says: "Twenty-five years the secret subject of
women was sex, now it's food."
     Another women says: "I have yet to meet a man who excites as much
as a baked potato."
     The mise-en-scene is a birthday party for three women turning 30,
40, and 50 respectively.  The house fills up with the women and their
guests -- no men, although God knows men are there spiritually,
psychologically, every way but physically.  One of the guests is a
charming French film maker who is doing a video on women and food.  She
starts taping and interviewing the party people.  Much of the movie is
these people telling the video camera about their secret lives vis-a-vis
food and eating, eating and sex, eating and abortions, eating and men,
eating and women, eating and mom or dad, eating and bingeing and bulemia
and anorexia and diets and guilt.  Eating becomes a metaphor, an entre
into the neuroses, relationships, and guilty pleasures of millions upon
millions of people in Western society.  
     What they say is so startlingly naked, true, earnest, and honest,
it delights your soul and breaks your heart simultaneously.
     Meanwhile, the principal characters are playing out various crises
in their tangled lives as the party and the interviews surge ahead
uncontrollably.  Marriages and friendships founder, people wake up to
themselves, things fall apart, and things come together, all in the
context of the party.
     This is heady stuff and the truly amazing thing is that it works as
a film.  Critics and viewers are inevitably want to compare EATING to
SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE.  EATING is better because it is at once more
concentrated and more diffuse, without the distraction of James Spader.
Jaglom makes us laugh and cry, shake our heads with disbelief and shake
our heads with recognition.  Even the resident, self-described bitch,
bulemic, back-stabbing, treacherous, miserable bitch, is in the end,
crouched on the bathroom floor, sympathetic if not likable.
     These people are victims of the idea that we can be perfect, that
perfection is not only attainable, but desirable.  Some of them are
perfect asses, but it is their imperfections that we love in them, that
Jaglom's camera makes us love.
     Jaglom's film have always been low-budget, ex-tempore affairs that
breathe with more genuine life than all the big budget blowouts that
Hollywood can churn out in a season.  EATING is particularly alive and
accessible.  That one about his divorce -- sorry, don't have the name
here -- in the end made me furious; maybe I just younger, but I think
the quest for perfection there made people stupid and unlovable, made
them spoiled rich kids.  These people are almost all from the sunny side
of the street, but my class-warfare bells don't go off this time.
     EATING is being distributed mostly to art houses, but I urge you to
see it if you possibly can.  I guarantee you it will be one of the films
on my ten-best list.

Title
Review for Patriot Games (1992)
     PATRIOT GAMES is a film directed by Philip Noyce and written by
W. Peter Illif and Donald Stewart, from the novel by Tom Clancy.  It
stars Harrison Ford, Anne Archer, Patrick Bergin, with Edward Fox, Thora
Birch, Sean Bean, James Earl Jones, Samuel Jackson, and Richard Harris.
Rated R, due to violence and profanity.
     PATRIOT GAMES is cinematic sequel to THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  The
continuing character of Jack Ryan is taken up this time by Harrison
Ford, who is now on the verge of owning what may well turn out to be the
three most popular trilogic heroes in movie history (such as it
is)--Han Solo, Indiana Jones, and now Jack Ryan.  Certainly, Ford
banishes all memory of Alec Baldwin's assay of the character in the
earlier Ryan movie.  Harrison's Ryan is supremely sensible, tightly
controlling both his anger with the terrorists who are threatening his
family and with the cold techno-killer bureaucracy of the CIA, to which
he returns.  There is a defining scene well into the latter part of the
movie of a remote-control kill that shows Ryan ambiguously reacting to
the impersonal horror and video-gamesmanship of high-tech mayhem.  It is
with this scene that PATRIOT GAMES marks itself off from the
run-of-the-mill political thriller.
     While Harrison Ford seems to have been a inspired choice to take
over the Ryan role, much of the credit for the film's excellences must
go to Philip Noyce, the Australian director who devastated so many of us
with his DEAD CALM (1989).  Last year's BLIND FURY may have represented
an unfortunate detour, but Noyce is back on track with PATRIOT GAMES.  I
particularly appreciated the little shticks he did with Thora Birch, the
Ryans' charmingly precocious daughter.  Her attempts to get the
attention of the guard at Buckingham Palace, her connoisseur's
expression of appreciation at his professionalism, her knowing little
smile in the heat of the last scenes, added charm and humanity to the
inherent coldness of a techno-thriller, as well as giving the little
girl a real personality and making more than a doll out of her
character.  It was especially the skill with which Noyce exploits the
mounting tension that is his speciality, his gift, as well as his
attention to both strategic detail (the film crew was allowed limited
access to the CIA facilities) and to the human dimensions.
     (By the way, who's seen Noyce's earlier Australian films,
NEWSFRONT, HEATWAVE, or ECHOES OF PARADISE?  I haven't, and they all
sound most intriguing.)
     Ford gets some humorous back up from his CIA colleagues Samuel
Jackson and James Earl Jones (the only RED OCTOBER alumnus to return);
Edward Fox is fine as the endangered royal with the common touch,
probably better than the House of Windsor deserves.  Anne Archer largely
reprieves her role as the worried mother from FATAL ATTRACTION, but
still elicits our sympathy and support; if only the Ryans weren't quite
such a perfect family, but still Archer knows what she's about and does
it sensibly and admirably.  Her scene involving a car phone busy at the
worst possible time is a fine moment in the history of suspense.
     The greatest weakness amongst the characterizations and in the plot
is found with the IRA characters.  We have Richard Harris in a small but
important role as the Sinn Fein bagman in the U.S.  who is trying to
dissociate the IRA from the current baddies without betraying his
patriotic loyalties to all Irish.  This is pretty complex stuff and the
film seems to assume that we will understand what's what here without
having to explore any of it on screen.  Then there are the bad guys who
break away from the IRA and in the process make that group look like so
many incompetent blunderers.  Patrick Bergin is a leader, a warrior, a
man with a vision, but we never get an inkling of what's really
motivating him or how he does those murderous miracles of his.  There is
certainly no attempt to understand the motivations or mind set of a
terrorist.  Sean Bean as the loose cannon is simply a monster.
     Composer James Horner needs a good talking to about his score which
seems to have been copied from ALIENS.
     PATRIOT GAMES opens no new territory in either story telling or
movie making, but it does leave us hanging at the end most pleasantly
and domestically on the end of a sequel hook.  I'm sure we will want to
come back for more of this kind of intelligence, suspense, humanity,
humor, and economy.

Title
Review for Diggstown (1992)
     DIGGSTOWN is a film directed by Michael Ritchie, from a script by
Steven McKay.  It stars James Woods, Lou Gossett, Jr., Bruce Dern,
Heather Graham.  Rated R for language.
     DIGGSTOWN is based on Leonard Wise's novel THE DIGGSTOWN RINGERS.
Presumably the novel is better than the script.  Steven McKay, whose
previous claim to fame is the script for Steven Segal's HARD TO KILL,
has no interest in his characters, sets up situations and drops them
without a word, fails to clarify motivations and relationships, and
generally does his best to undermine the fine acting turns by James
Woods, Lou Gossett, Jr., and Bruce Dern, as well as some successful
boxing sequences, and a nicely corrupt small town.
     Of course, it would be a mistake to lay all the blame at the feet
of the writer.  One must also remember the failures of the director,
Michael Ritchie.  Ritchie directed one of the great and timeless
political movie, THE CANDIDATE.  Since then he has been settling for the
small and short-lived: Chevy Chase's Fletch flicks, THE COUCH TRIP, THE
SURVIVORS.  Ritchie has all the earmarks of the classic Hollywood
sellout, as DIGGSTOWN amply demonstrates.
     If you must see this film, go for the performances.  The three
principals are all fine.  Woods is the ex-con con man out to take a big
killing in Diggstown, some sort of small-town boxing capital (named for
its favorite-son boxer, now its favorite vegetable).  Gossett, whom we
are asked to accept as a 48-year-old retired knock-out artist, is
clearly trying to redeem himself for his lowbrow series of IRON EAGLE
movies, sweats, bleeds, and wise-cracks; it's never quite believable, of
course, Gossett is too old and too thick in the waist, despite his
excellent condition, for the part, but still it's a game effort.  Dern
is a cold-hearted, power-hunger s.o.b.  who can betray anyone, even his
own son.  He is reptilian and unctuous, vicious and driven, and one has
to admire his black, black heart.
     The supporting cast is also good, especially Oliver Platt as
Woods's front man, Orestes Matacena as the heavy money from Miami (there
something so sinister about his bald pate and huge ponytail), Thomas
Wilson Brown as Dern's fawning son.  Dern's other hangers-on are also
suitably corrupt and venal.  There are two actors who play a pair of
brothers, whose names I didn't catch, and who did fine in their parts as
two of the fighters who sign on to challenge Gossett to ten fights in 24
hours.
     You might want to catch this one on video, but I cannot recommend
it to anyone but a special-interest viewer, even at matinee prices.  The
script and direction problems simply swamp the acting and the result is
to leave one with a feeling of being cheated by a couple of con men,
which is a little too recursive for real life.

Title
Review for Rebro Adama (1990)
     ADAM'S RIB is a Russian film directed by Vyacheslav Krishtolovich.
It stars Inna Churikova, Svetlana Ryabova, Masha Golubkina, and Elena
Bogdanova.  With English subtitles.  Unrated.
     ADAM'S RIB follows a few days in the lives of four women in a small
Moscow apartment: the paralyzed grandmother, the mother who works
part-time as a docent in a museum of the Revolution and who worries
full-time, and two daughters, sired by two very different husbands.  The
men are peripheral to their lives, even as much as they affect them in
various ways.  Everybody comes together at babushka's birthday party,
where various crises appear to come to the surface, some not for the
first time.  When the movie ends, nothing is resolved except that the
three youngest agree that they cannot rely on anyone or anything (the
unspoken exception being each other).  The film ends with a kind of
miracle the meaning of which no one is sure.
     Characterizations are the entire raison d'etre for this film.  The
four principals are sharply drawn, three-dimensional characters with
whom we feel both comfortable and familiar.  I was especially impressed
by Inna Churikova, the grandmother, who invests her paralysis with great
emotion and strength.  The scene between her and Svetlana Ryabova, her
daughter, in which Ryabova first reads her mother the riot act and then
begs forgiveness, is one of great power, a tour-de-force for both women.
     The men include an office womanizer, an ineffectual, weak law
student who aspires to become a thug, the two ex-husbands -- one a Jew,
one an anti-Semite -- and a new beau for the mother, sweet, shy, with
unexpected strengths and compassion.  Yet none of them is there when
babushka's bed pan needs changing.  The women bicker amongst themselves
in their crowded flat, but they are ones who are there to do the dirty
work for each other, to figure how to make their menage survive.
     This is a small film, but sharply focused, incisively written and
performed.  With no budget, no resources, no filmstock in all
likelihood, the film maker and his crew and cast concentrate on giving
us a small gem of insight, wisdom, and passion.
     If you have a chance to see this Russian ADAM'S RIB, do yourself a
great favor and do so, regardless of the cost.

Title
Review for Enchanted April (1992)
     ENCHANTED APRIL is a film by Mike Newell, from a script by Peter
Barnes.  It stars Josie Lawrence, Miranda Richardson, Joan Plowright,
and Polly Walker, with Alfred Molina, Michael Kitchen, and Jim
Broadbent.  Photographed by Rex Maidment.  Based on a novel by Elizabeth
Von Armin.  Rated PG, due to subject matter.
     ENCHANTED APRIL is another entry in the ongoing series of costume
pictures based on British novels of the 1920s, especially the ones where
the Britons go to Italy to thaw out emotionally and elsewise.  Unlike
ROOM WITH A VIEW or WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD, the source material here
is not E. M. Forester, but Elizabeth Von Armin, a writer with
considerably less reputation amongst today's readers.  By all reports,
Peter Barnes, who wrote THE RULING CLASS, has trimmed much deadwood from
the novel, the clumsy humor and several subplots, to concentrate on the
recuperative magic of a special place.  In this case, the special place
is a small Italian castle overlooking the sea and surrounded by gardens
and woods of the most exquisite beauty.  The film was shot sequentially
in the same place that Von Armin wrote her novel, St. George's Fortress
(now called Castello Brown), near Portofino.  It may that the actors
were as affected by the place as were their characters, for the change
that comes over everyone is remarkably visible in their faces and body
language.
     The story is slight, even hard to believe due to its sunny outlook,
its familiarity, even its magic.  But it provides a framework for some
lovely ensemble acting by four of Britain's best.  Joan Plowright, the
vinegary old survivor of the Victorian literary set, who want to sit in
the shade and remember better times, takes over any scene she's in,
which is as it should be.  Polly Walker plays the beautiful,
aristocratic leader of London's smart set, who is tired of being the
center of attention, of the empty life.  Josie Lawrence is a rather
fanciful, intuitive London housewife who is bullied by her tightwad
husband (Alfred Molina).  And Miranda Richardson goes against type and
plays a dowdy suburban housewife, who does not approve of her
novelist-husband's books.  He's played by Jim Broadbent.  The third man
in the story is the owner of the castle, Michael Kitchen, who drops in
on the group after they're well ensconced in Italy.
     ENCHANTED APRIL, despite it thinness, its incredibility, is both
magical and very funny.  The actors are superb.  The photography fills
you longing to get on the next plane for Portofino.  The transformation
the place effects is not quite made accessible to us, we are reduced to
taking it on face, but it is good to believe in something so
rejuvenating, so recuperative.
     I can recommend ENCHANTED APRIL to anyone in need of little uplift.

Title
Review for Mississippi Masala (1991)
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA is a film by Mira Nair.  The script was written
by Sooni Toraparevala.  The film stars Denzel Washington, Roshan Seth,
Sarita Choudhury, Sharmila Tagore.  It is rated R for sexual situations.
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA is the creation of the same director who gave us
SALAAM BOMBAY! (1988), one of my favorite films of all time.  MASALA
does not have the visceral impact as the film about Bombay's street
kids, but it does have the same sweetness and affection for its
characters.  This film is a variation on Romeo and Juliet, for all
intents and purposes, wherein the opposing families are
African-Americans and transplanted African-Indians, coexisting in
Greenwood, Mississippi, superficially peaceful until Demetrius (Denzel
Washington), the self-starter with his own carpet-cleaning business,
crosses the invisible line and finds himself in a situation with the
dark-skinned Mina.  Mina (Sarita Choudhury) is the 24-year-old daughter
of a former lawyer (Roshan Seth) who is consumed with getting back his
Ugandan citizenship, lost when Idi Amin expelled all the Indians in his
country in 1972.  Her mother (Sharmila Tagore) runs a liquor store and
tries to run Mina's life and marry her off to slightly slimey Hari.  
     Like EUROPA, EUROPA, another film about racism and displacement, 
MASALA is concerned first with the characters' quest for identity, for
finding a place that is home.  The Indians seem to take India with them
whether they are in Kampala or Greenwood (Mina herself has never been to
India).  The Indians, especially a trio of men, seem to be somewhat
stock characters, figures of satire, on whom little love is wasted; the
most sympathetic of the three is played by Ranjit Chowdry (LONELY IN
AMERICA, 1991) as a motel owner.  The black characters are treated
overall more affectionately.  However, it is Nair's skill with the major
actors that makes MASALA worthy of your attention.  Certainly the story
itself is familiar and predictable.
     Denzel Washington is just as charming and handsome as ever,
obviously having a great time playing a homeboy.  Sarita Choudhury is
innocently sensual, fiercely determined to become her own person; the
actress grew up in Jamaica--look for her Bob Marley T-shirt.  Sharmila
Tagore, a regular in the films of Indian master Satyajit Ray, is
strong-willed, loving, frightened for her daughter and her husband, the
sole support of the family while the father is lost in his dreams of
return.  He is played by Roshan Seth, who played Nehru in GANDHI (1982);
he is deeply sympathetic, and infuriating at the same time.  It is his
personal discoveries that are the backbone of the movie.  
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA (masala is explained in the movie as being mixed
up, like spices) satirizes the rivalries of two oppressed races in the
former heartland of racial oppression.  It says racial bigotry is not
only irrational, but doomed to die.  The final scene, at Entebbe
Airport, involving Seth and an black African baby is deeply moving and
emotional, a symbol that passes beyond explication and says it all at
the same time.

Title
Review for What About Bob? (1991)
     WHAT ABOUT BOB? is a film starring Bill Murray and Richard Dreyfuss.
     My expectations were not high going into the auditorium.  Bill
Murray is one of the most uneven, undisciplined stars in Hollywood today
and Richard Dreyfuss isn't far behind.  Which means mugging, smirking,
doing this eye-thing with the camera that says hey watch me I'm being
pretty cute over here.
     Leaving the auditorium, I felt I had been entertained, albeit in a
rather predictable, formulaic way, but, yes, I had had a pretty decent
time back there in the dark with Bill and Richard.
     Bill Murray's character Bob is a near-basket case of neuroses.
Agoraphobia, haphephobia (irrational fear of being touched -- old
Peanuts joke "Haphephobia is better than none"), manipulative,
dependent.
     Richard Dreyfuss is his new, ambitious, success-obsessed doc.  He
had a bust of Freud in his office, he's named his children Sigmund and
Anna, his wife is a doormat, and he's out the door, on vacation until
Labor Day.
     Bob's wants treatment now and follows his new doc to his New
England retreat (Virginia stands in for Vermont here).  The doc expects a
live remote for Goodmorning America and gets Bob.
     Whose crazy, Bob, the doc, or the audience?  One gets better, one
will get better, and the third will get over it.  Okay, for matinee
prices it's okay.  Murray and Dreyfuss efficiently chew every stick of
scenery the script hands them.  They're cute, they're sort of funny in
an icky way.  I mean we are laughing at crazy people here, aren't we?

Title
Review for Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994)
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a film by Mike Newell and written
by Richard Curtis.  It stars Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott
Thomas, Simon Callow, James Fleet, John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman,
David Bower, Corin Redgrave, and Rowan Atkinson.  Rated R, for language
and sexual references.
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a romantic comedy directed by Mike
Newell, the English directory previously responsible for SOURSWEET,
DANCE WITH A STRANGER, INTO THE WEST, and ENCHANTED APRIL.  It is
obvious Newell is more than fond of the characters in Richard Curtis's
script.  Indeed, there is barely mean bone in the film's entire body.
Curtis has given Newell and us a somewhat gimmicky story that follows
Charles (Hugh Grant) through the four weddings and the funeral of the
title as he finds and loses the love of his life, a mysterious American
(Andie MacDowell).  The gimmicks work because Curtis crafts every scene
until it gleams with a polished wit that slices up the genteel society
of posh people who seem to do nothing but go to posh affairs into
delectable hors d'oeuvres.
     The script provides precious few explanations of who all these
people are and what they do when they are not got up in cutaways and
big hats.  It gives us not a hint of who the MacDowell character is or
why she goes to so many British weddings.  She remains an enigma,
mostly because she like everything else is seen strictly from Charles's
point of view and Charles's is befuddled as only an English gentleman
can be.
     Hugh Grant's performance as Charles carries the film.  It's hard
to imagine any other British star carrying off this difficult role
quite so well.  For not only must Charles mutter, run his finger
through his hair, and generally fret in his singularly confused way,
but he must make himself likable to the audience in spite of the fact
that he is, as one ex-girl friend says, a serial monogamist,
well-intentioned enough, but a bit of a bounder.  We forgive him
because Grant's Charles possesses charm, charisma, and a pained
vulnerability and a wonderful cast of oddly sorted friends.
     Amongst these friends is Simon Callow, the gay actor/director
(ROOM WITH A VIEW, BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE) who plays one half (or
perhaps two-thirds, given the size of his person and his personality)
of a gay couple.  These two gay men are held up explicitly as the very
type of the perfect lovers, the standard against which all the straight
characters judge their own efforts to mate well.
     For that is the subject matter here: finding and keeping the right
person.  This is an intensely romantic film, despite all its hilarious
humor and satiric pokes, a film that says loves is the point  and the
purpose, if there be any point and purpose at all.  And the ways to
mate are as endless and varied and personal as the people in the
world.
     I unreservedly recommend FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  It will be
a great date movie, a great couple's movie, even a great singles'
movie.  It is very funny, very sweet, and the feeling you have at the
end is worth whatever you paid to get in.

Title
Review for One Good Cop (1991)
     ONE GOOD COP is a movie starring Michael Keaton.  It also features
Rene Russo.
     I was disturbed by this superficially likable film.  I have enjoyed
Michael Keaton's screen presence since BEETLEJUICE and I am intrigued by
the range he is capable of, going from that zaniness to CLEAN AND SOBER
in the same summer.  I liked Rene Russo, who was a supermodel in
Seventies and shows every sign that unlike most ex-models she can
actually act and more than competently, too.  I like the three little
girls who are suddenly thrust into the adults' comfortable lives by the
death of Keaton's police partner.
     I liked the way Keaton's character, Lewis, could be strong and
tough with the bad guys and still warm and loving with his wife, the
girls, and his partner, whom he exuberantly kisses on the cheek on a
park bench.  I liked the moral outrage he feels towards the bad guy,
Beniamino the iceman, who drives a red Rolls-Royce, while a neighborhood
Catholic church is packed with homeless people.
     But then we get into the crux of the story and my admiration turns
into discomfort.  Lewis rips off Beniamino, buys a house so he can keep
the girls, gives the rest to the church, gets captured and tortured,
winds up slaughtering the bad guys, and getting off completely.  The
story apparently thinks this is okay.  I'm afraid I don't.  One good cop
turned into one bad cop and the resolution stinks of either moral
corruption or bad writing.  I'll go with bad writing in view of the
secular nature of my forum.
     The writers and the director, whose names are not in any of the
display ads in front of me, were either too lazy or too contemptuous of
the audience to find a better resolution, a better ending than to return
Lewis to the force and to his family.
     As a result, I cannot recommend ONE GOOD COP except with the most
extreme reservations.  Bad writing should not be supported, no matter
how much we like the stars, because we will just see more of this kind
of sloppiness and we are already drowning in a sea of sleaze.  
     (Moral outrage -- sorry, it's hard to hold it in, I might wind up
hurting myself; bad writing is immoral.)
     (And please, friends, don't write me to remind that this is just a
movie and to lighten up.  I don't need cliches on top of sleaze and
slop.)

Title
Review for Bob Roberts (1992)
     BOB ROBERTS is a film directed and written by Tim Robbins and
produced by Fred Murray.  It stars Tim Robbins, Gore Vidal, Giancarlo
Esposito, Ray Wise, Alan Rickman.  It is rated R for mature themes.
     BOB ROBERTS is Tim Robbins's nearly perfect debut as a
writer-director-star.  The debut takes the form of a devastating,
mock-documentary satire of new-right politics, a satire inspired by the
rise of David Duke.  Robbins has acknowledged THIS IS SPINAL TAP (1984)
as his primary inspiration.  Like SPINAL TAP, BOB ROBERTS begins with
the music industry, but the new film quickly leaves most of that behind
as it takes up and develops a chronicle of a too-true-to-be-funny
Pennsylvania senatorial campaign.  Roberts is a Young Conservatives'
version of Bob Dylan, a folksinger who trades foreign currencies between
gigs and whose songs praise getting rich and denounce the poor and
disadvantaged as the enemy.  His opponent is a patrician veteran, played
wisely and humorously by Gore Vidal (he improvised some of his own
dialog), an old-fashioned liberal who is cynical about the political
process even while remaining passionate about his vision of government
and the American spirit.  The campaign takes place in the months before
the outbreak of the Gulf War.
     The comparison with Dylan is explicit in Roberts's album cover art
and music videos, but with titles like "The Times They Are A-Changin'
Back" and "This Land Is Made For Me."  A lot of people, especially young
whites from privileged classes, are shown idolizing Roberts, but some
other folks see through him.  His slipperiness and his uncanny ability
to defang his attackers is only a hint of his dark determination to win.
     Even darker is the presence of an eminence grise played by Alan
Rickman, a shadowy backer with even more shadowy connections to the CIA
and the savings-and-loan scandal.  Rickman is excellent in his
single-minded and frightening grimness.
     Giancarlo Esposito plays with growing hysteria and fatalism the
persistent investigative reporter for the counterculture press.  His
performance merges seamlessly with Jean Lepine's cinema-verite-style
camerawork to create a convincing illusion of a sensational story
unfolding before us.
     Other performers of note include Susan Sarandon, James Spader, and
Pamela Reed, who wittily play news-anchors down to the last blow-dried
hair.
     But, of course, it is Tim Robbins who carries the movie and the
day.  Fresh from the triumph of THE PLAYER.  He has created a funny
black comedy, a convincing character study, and a first-rate
political/paranoia conspiracy movie.  The aim as well as the
accomplishment goes far beyond that of SPINAL TAP.  I was intensely
impressed by the pacing of the story, as we move from Life Styles of the
Rich and Politically Ambitious narrated by a British documentary maker
through increasingly disturbing questions about the goals and methods of
the Roberts campaign until we end in a morass of the worst sort.  Yet
never does Robbins allow the documentary conventions to slip (like ZELIG
and unlike CITIZEN KANE).  The only time we see Roberts "off-camera" is
when he is tricked into thinking the all-seeing red eye was off.  It
means that the film has to exploit irony to a degree seldom seen in an
American film.  Alternate points of view come through talking heads, not
through dramatic situations, generally.  And Robbins, himself, has to
put in a less strenuous acting job and can glide largely on his natural
charm, thus taking some of the pressure off him as writer and director,
to say nothing of composing and performing Roberts's horrible songs.
     I simply cannot recommend BOB ROBERTS too highly to you.  It is
original, fully realized, entertaining, smart, and chilling.  Pay what
you must but see it.

Title
Review for Mermaids (1990)
     MERMAIDS is Cher's first movie in two years, the last being the
wonderful MOONSTRUCK.  MERMAIDS is directed by Richard Benjamin and
co-stars Winona Ryder and Bob Hoskins.
     First off, let me just say that I love Cher and have since the
early Sixties; she is outre and outrageous and sane and I admire her
intelligence and acumen, her strength and courage, all of which, I
think, are visible in her life and her acting.  Next let me say that
Cher is not a great actress; her range and her gifts are narrow, but
within her limitations she can be amazing.
     Cher was amazing in MOONSTRUCK.  In MERMAIDS, she's wonderful, but
not quite amazing.  One of the reasons is that this movie is not quite
the movie the older one was, it lacks that romantic moment of magic, the
transformations of love.  This is not to say that MERMAIDS doesn't try
to achieve a moment like the one in MOONSTRUCK when all the principals
are looking at the full, huge moon from their several windows.  The
comparable moment in MERMAIDS, which involves a room painted and lighted
to look like a fantasy of the bottom of the sea fails; the audience does
not enter into the vision, it merely sees Cher momentarily entranced by
it.  This is not Cher's fault, but the result of some faulty direction
on the part of Richard Benjamin (who was once a comic actor himself and
had a charming failure of a TV series, called HE AND SHE, co-starring
his wife Paula Prentiss).
     Another reason is that Cher seems to be stepping back to allow
Winona Ryder plenty of elbow room.  This is really Ryder's film.  She is
the voice-over narrator and provides the audience's point of view.  The
film is about her coming of age much more than it is about Cher's
character, Rachel, doing some growing up of her own.  The film is also
about the relationship between the mother and the daughter, and most of
the best scenes and best lines concentrate of this.
     In fact, Winona Ryder gives the amazing performance in this film.
Her range and her gifts seems unlimited and promise even greater things
as she matures.  She is the glue that holds this movie together.
     The movie is mostly comedy with one melodramatic episode and it's
the kind of movie with wonderful one-liners that people are going to be
pleased to quote to each other.  "Death is dwelling on the past and
staying in one place too long."  "All of Charlotte's ages are
difficult."  The script is by June Roberts, who wrote "Experience
Preferred .  .  .  But not Essential," and is based on a novel by Patty
Danns.
     In addition to Cher and Ryder, the other principals include
Hoskins, who, although he has been adorable, has never been cuter than
in his role of the shoe-store owner and boyfriend.  In fact, his mugging
and eye-brow waggling are on the verge of being totally out of control
by the last scene.
     And then there is the role of the younger daughter, played by
Christina Ricci, who impressed me tremendously.  A natural, eccentric
child who seemed oblivious to the camera.
     Finally, I need to say something about Benjamin's direction and
Roberts' script.  The finest, most singular scene in MERMAIDS concerns
the morning John Kennedy was assassinated.  I was in tears during the
entire scene, it so perfectly brought back exactly what that experience
was like for all of us who were alive then and old enough to understand
it.  Men standing in the street with tears streaming down their faces.
Clots of people watching TV together in doorways.  An entire nation come
to a standstill.  The evocation of '63-'64 is almost flawless (I saw a
couple of impossible details in set decors, but that's pretty good);
certainly the spirit of the times beautifully invoked.  The soundtrack
will undoubtedly find a good sales, being choked full of all sorts of
"classics" of the period.  These are praiseworthy qualities the director
and writer have brought to the movie.
     On the other hand, I was upset by some of the directional
decisions.  Benjamin made some awkwards cuts, for one thing, especially
one where Cher slaps Ryder in the kitchen and suddenly we cut to the
living room; it was absolutely disorienting, completely without
continuity.  Inexcusably awkward.  
     Overall, I can recommend MERMAIDS.  It's funny, and entertaining,
and it leaves you feeling good at the end.  I note that the audience
that I was part of was overwhelming composed of women.  From this, I
take it that MERMAIDS is women's film.  I think that lots of people will
go to MERMAIDS and they will go back a second and third time.

Title
Review for Erotique (1994)
     EROTIQUE is an anthology film by three directors, Lizzie Borden,
Monika Treut, and Clara Law.  The casts of their three short films
include Kamala Lopez-Dawson, Bryan Cranston, Priscilla Barnes, Camilla
Soeberg, Tim Lounibos, and Hayley Man.
     EROTIQUE received its world premiere at the Seattle International
Film Festival and I understand is booked to return to Seattle later
this year (in fact I saw a trailer for it last night when I went to
KIKA).  Frankly, the fact that EROTIQUE has found a distributor and
bookings surprises me because the film is so uneven overall.  The first
part has the best story; the second has the highest kink contents; the
third part looks like outtakes from a much longer film.
     "Let's Talk About Sex" is directed by Lizzie Borden and written by
Borden and Susie Bright.  In it, Kamala Lopez-Dawson is an aspiring
actress who is being offered only humiliating roles of hookers and
barmaids who have a sex scene and then never heard of again, because
she's not blonde and anglo.  She supports herself by working in a
phone-sex boiler room.  She rebels against having the same, blonde-big
hooter fantasies imposed on her by customers until she finds one (Bryan
Cranston) who want to hear her sexual fantasies.  The final upshot of
this is a surprising and sexy last scene meeting between the two.  The
scenes in the boiler room, the women who work the phones and the johns,
the man who goads them on to keep the suckers on the line, and calls
they handle are hilarious and interesting.  The fantasy sequences
demonstrate why it is probably imprudent to talk about sexual fantasies
to strangers, but the interactions and growing telephonic intimacy
between Lopez-Dawson and Cranston is sexy and intriguing.  Overall,
this the best segment.
     "Taboo Parlor," directed by Monika Treut, involves two drop-dead
lesbians (Priscilla Barnes and Camilla Soeberg), the younger of whom
has yen for seducing men from time to time.  They go to a ship-board
nightclub in the Hamburg docks (look for Marianne Sagebrecht as the
dance mistress) and find a particularly dangerous stud to take home.
The three-way develops in a direction that surprises him and us, but
him more finally.  In the end, the whole smacks a little of the evil
lesbian of pulp homophobic literature and left me uncomfortable and not
a little puzzled, but the sex was erotic and something of a turn-on, if
that was the point because it was pretty hard to find a point to this
film.
     "Wonton Soup," directed by Clara Law and set in Hong Kong, is the
story of a Chinese-Australian (Tim Lounibos) who is persuaded to return
to his cultural roots and ancient Chinese sexual techniques to win back
his lover (Hayley Man).  The scene where they work their way their the
manual is hilarious, but the rest of it is undeveloped and fragmentary
at best (interestingly, in the trailer there is scene from this story
that is not in the released version I saw).  And as the last part of
EROTIQUE, it makes one exit with a decidedly negative impression of the
entire work.
     I cannot really recommend EROTIQUE, even though some of its parts
are stimulating in one way or the other.

Title
Review for Hachigatsu no kyoshikyoku (1991)
     RHAPSODY IN AUGUST is a Japanese-language film by Akira Kurosawa.
It stars Sachiko Murase, Hisashi Igawa, Richard Gere.  It is written by
Kurosawa, based on the novel "Nabe-no-Naka" by Kiyoko Murata.  English
subtitles.  Rated PG for mature themes.
     Akira Kurosawa at 81 is establishing his career in a vigorous and
creative old age, like the Japanese painter whose artist's name became
"Old Man Mad About Painting."  Last year a lot of us went to KUROSAWA'S
DREAMS, thinking it would be sensei's last hurrah.  Fortunately, we
youngsters were wrong again.
     RHAPSODY is about the way humans forget about painful memories and
the importance of remembering and conquering that pain.  Pain in this
case is in the form of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki, as remembered by
an old woman Kane (Sachiko Murase) and as discovered by her children and
grandchildren.
     The grandchildren are the narrative focus of the film.  They are
stuck with spending the summer at an old-fashioned farm over the
mountain from Nagasaki.  Granny's been invited to take them to Hawaii to
meet the American branch of the family, including Richard Gere (the
first American to be cast in a Kurosawa film).  She refuses because her
husband died that day 9 August 1945.  On a shopping trip to Nagasaki,
the kids in their American t-shirts discover memorials to the bomb and
its victims.  For the first time, the horror of that day comes home to
them.  Kane's children treat the story as bad manners that might offend
their new, rich American connections.  Gere flies to Japan to apologize,
not for the bomb, but for not ever thinking about how his uncle might
have died, no never thinking about it.
     The scene between Gere and the grandmother is only one of many
wondrous moments in this film.  His performance, which occupies less
than a third of the film, is warm, effortless, mostly in Japanese.
Indeed, sensei himself says the film is about human warmth, feelings,
kindness.  And I would add justice.  In the end, Kane has committed a
unkindness herself and the final scene of her expiation is remarkable
for its visual quality and for the audacious sound track that
accompanies it.
     Murase as Kane is the soul and emotional and moral center of the
movie.  Her frail tiny body, with its beautiful face like a mask, burns
with a fiery fear and compassion.  That final scene, unforgettable as it
is, is only one of many, for example, Granny "visiting" her fellow
survivor, or Granny eating a bean, that continue to burn vividly in my
memory.
     The children are charming, but not quite real.  They come closest
to being mere stick figures that exist only to announce the sensei's
message.  For better or worse, Kurosawa-san is an artist who is willing
to take a chance, even with telling us what we need to hear.
     As a film maker, sensei has eschewed the lavish costumes and period
charm of RAN and segments of DREAMS to produce what might be the
definitive Japanese film.  He sticks to medium- and low-camera angles
without closeups, long static scenes, and intimate human interactions
(as Jeff Shannon pointed out in his review in the Seattle P-I).
     To anyone who thinks he or she can sit through a very non-Hollywood
film, I recommend RHAPSODY IN AUGUST most highly.  Pay what you have to,
it's for a good cause.

Title
Review for Point Break (1991)
     POINT BREAK is a movie by Kathryn Bigelow.  The script is by W.
Peter Iliff.  It stars Patrick Swayze, Keanu Reeves, Gary Busey, and
Lori Petty.
     If I were one of those professional, cynical, go-for-the-joke
critics, I would suggest retitling POINT BREAK "Beach Blanket Burglary."
Instead, I'm going to say that this is an acceptable summer movie with
some good action photography of the ENDLESS SUMMER school, a nutty,
preposterous story -- excessive, fun, but a little too long.  And it has
some interesting people in the cast.
     The directory Kathryn Bigelow, who previously directed BLUE STEEL,
has turned out a slightly schizoid movie that's rather funny in the
first part and hyperviolent in the second part.  The script is a joke
about surfers financing their "endless summer" by donning rubber masks,
doing Tricky Dick imitations, and robbing 30 banks in 4 years, and about
two FBI agents, the burnt-out vet (Gary Busey) and the new hot-shot
(Keanu Reeves) who track them down.  Cinematography is by Donald
Peterman, who gives us some great zoom-lens work on mountainous surf and
who also gives a truly impressive sky-diving sequence.  Unfortunately,
Bigelow lets the movie run down at the end and gets pretty sloppy about
continuity.  She also use an Oregon coast locale as a budget-saving
stand-in for Australia.  I spotted it instantly and anyone who knows
either place will too.
     She does get a funny performance out of Swayze, who is not the star
of this movie, despite his top billing.  Reeves carries it, as best he
can.  I think the jury is still out on this particular Brat Packer.
Swayze plays the leader of the Ex-Presidents Gang, a pseudo-mystical
guru of b.s.  who justifies his violence, felonies, and betrayals as
inspiring all us "dead souls inching along the freeways in their metal
coffins."  It was good to see Swayze in a negative role.  Swayze did a
lot of his own stunts--at least the easy parts that required only a
beginner's skills--but that is him on the board and him going out the
plane door.  He's a gutsy guy, and I will admit to a sneaking admiration
for him.  (But then, I liked ROAD HOUSE.)
     Gary Busey does a good turn as the alternately time-serving hack
and obsessed pro; he is wigged-out and screwy.  Busey is a lot of fun to
have in any movie.
     And then there's the fresh surprise, Lori Petty, who plays the
surfer who first teaches Reeves and then sleeps with him.  I liked this
woman a lot.  She has presence and a distinctive voice; she's small and
pretty in a perky, independent way.  She leaves a group of male surfers
talking about their death wishes with the line "There's too much
testosterone here."  I hope to see her again.
     (Anybody who knows neat stuff about Petty, write me.  I'm
interested (no, not in that way, silly).)
     There're a lot of f-words, a lot of splashy violence, no nudity
(except in one very violent FBI raid, where is there is women in a
shower and another in a thong), no sex as such, a lot of action, some
humor.  You might like to take this one in, but pay matinee rates only.
It is not worth full fare.  Or wait for the video and relive the summer
next winter.

Title
Review for Kika (1993)
     KIKA is a Spanish film written and directed by Pedro Almodovar.  It
stars Veronica Forque, Victoria Abril, Peter Coyote, Alex Casanovas,
Rossy de Palma.  Rated NC-17--no one under 17 admitted because of sex
scenes, graphic rape scene.  English subtitles.
     KIKA represents a return to the earlier, more vital energy and
spirit of the older Almodovar films, the ones made before 1988's WOMEN
ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN (MUJERES AL BORDRE DE LA ATAQUE DE
NERVIOS) made him an international star director.  WOMEN ON THE VERGE
for all its style and wit is an experiment in artificiality, like the
deliberately unconvincing Madrid skyline as seen from the terrace of
Pepa's (Carmen Maura) apartment.  Or like the closing song, "Teatro
puro," WOMEN is pure theatricality, all style, in which life is a chic
joke made up of many little jokes.  KIKA, to some extent, shares these
qualities with WOMEN, but here the joke is a very dark one and
Almodovar returns to something like the anger of his earlier, pre-WOMEN
films, films like LAW OF DESIRE (1987) and WHAT HAVE I DONE TO DESERVE
THIS? (1985).
     And what symbolizes and encapsulates this dark, angry joke?
Television tabloid "news" shows and the end of privacy.  Victoria Abril
plays Andrea Scarface, the last word is exploitative, invasive, and
manipulative voyeurism, as host of "Today's Worst."  She hosts it
wearing dresses shredded, black, red, with artificial breasts exploding
through the bodices, like Morticia Addams after a bad experience with a
Cuisinart.  She even highlights with makeup the scar that gives her her
name.  In addition, she cruises around Madrid on a motorcycle and
wearing an outfit that makes her look like a Martian: her high-tech
leathers featuring camera lights for breasts (ever heard a woman's
breasts called headlights?) and topped off by a crash helmet with a
surmounting camcorder.  The video camera takes on a life and
personality of its own in one crucial scene and the question is where
is the human here--not the insensitive Andrea inside the suit, not the
suit with its buttons and controls, maybe the camcorder?  Abril is an
extraordinary actress with staggering powers of invention, who can be
sinister, funny, and pathetic at the same time.
     Kika herself is played with exhausting energy by Veronica Forque,
she of the hyperactive motormouth, a makeup artist who meets her future
husband, Ramon, when she's called upon to make up his presumably dead
corpse.  Ramon is played by Alex Casanovas in a typical Almodovar male
role--withdrawn, uncommunicative, secretive, a cipher.  It's the women
Almodovar loves to depict and explore in his films; men, he says, bore
him.  Kika gets to do a little growing up in the course of the film and
it is she who must suffer the now infamous rape of the film, infamous
because the scene is played for laughs.  She's scared, she's in danger,
she's mad at the rapist, a former porno star who's escaped from prison,
but she also wants him not to take all afternoon.  She has things to
do.  It's what comes afterwards that is the real rape in this case, the
police, the husband, and especially the helmeted camera of Andrea who
wants to interview the victim as she's comes out of the shower.  This
is the point that critics who condemn this film miss.  There is nothing
funny about this second rape.  It's far and away the more damaging and
leads directly to bloodshed and death.
     Also in the cast and complicating the story are Peter Coyote as
Ramon's stepfather and lover to just about ever women in the film,
Santiago Lajusticia, as the rapist, and Rossy de Palma, she of the
Picasso face, here playing Kika's lesbian maid and sister of the
rapist.  Almodovar is the consummate actors' director and he continues
to get the most astonishing performances out of his actors.
     KIKA has its faults.  At 120 minutes, it is too long to sustain
itself.  It should have concentrated more on Andrea Scarface and less
on Kika, a not very interesting person before her rape, as superficial
as her makeup.  Abril was supposedly given her choice of which
character to play.  She chose wisely.
     Nevertheless, I highly recommend KIKA to you.  It has the flash,
wit, and style of WOMEN ON THE VERGE, the standard for better or worse
by which all Almodovar films are judged, as well as the rage and
satiric bite of his earlier work.

Title
Review for Stranger Among Us, A (1992)
     A STRANGER AMONG US is a film directed by Sydney Lumet.  It stars
Melanie Griffith, Eric Thal, Mia Sara, Lee Richardson, and Tracy Pollan.
Rated R for violence.
     A STRANGER AMONG US is a cop show that would have been better to
have eschewed the shoot-up and chases, the Irish cop and Italian thugs,
and to have found another excuse for letting a liberated shiksa find
family and friendship and her own soul amongst the Hasidim of New York.
The crime that gives the cop her entree into this island of 19th
century, mystical Judaism is largely pro forma and uninteresting, and
for most of the film, and especially its best parts, is strictly on the
back burner.  The interest of the film comes in the cop's growing
involvement with her Hasidic "family," her growth as a complete human
being, and especially her relationship with the rebbe's son.
     Of course, for us who are outsiders, there is the interest and
attraction of seeing and learning something of this fascinating world.
This isn't a travelogue ("as the sun sets on the happy natives of
Hasid-land"), and it never pretends to being anything but friendly to
Hasidism.  Every Hasidic interior is bathed in the golden light of
spirituality.  These Hasidim are uniformly cheerful, friendly, and
entirely free of sectarian rivalries.  They are a community.  The film
makes you regret you are not part of that community.  But the film does
a creditable job as an introduction, even though its purpose is not
promoting Hasidism, but a spiritual life within a family of your
choosing in whatever context is appropriate for you.
     Sidney Lumet, the son of a Yiddish theater star and director of
TWELVE ANGRY MEN, SERPICO, NETWORK, and DOG DAY AFTERNOONS, has given us
an interesting film about spirituality, as personified by an idealized
portrait of the New York Hasidic community and as disguised as a police
drama.  In the process, he has coaxed an energetic and intriguing
performance from Melanie Griffith as Emily Eden the cynical detective
who is afraid of commitment and he has discovered an attractive and
promising actor, Eric Thal, as the Talmudic scholar and Kaballistic
mystic who becomes Emily's contact point with the closed and hermetic
world of the Hasidim.  (Thal originally was cast for a lesser role, but
showed so much promise that he was promoted to the pivotal role of
Ariel, the rebbe's heir apparent.)
     Griffith has always seemed an interesting performer to me.  I
remember with no small pleasure her performance in WORKING GIRL, in
which she easily held her own against Harrison Ford and especially a
powerful satire by Sigourney Weaver.  STRANGER only adds to my
impression of her as a slightly unappreciated, underused resource of no
small power.  She contrives to tough, callous, fragile, and in pain, at
the same time; Emily is the victim of her Irish-cop father, who cannot
express anything as unmanly as love for his cop daughter, she is the
victim of her own fear of life who refuses to love the man she sleeps
with.  She starts off in the rebbe's office with the grace and
sensitivity of a water buffalo and ends whole, healed, and
self-accepting.
     But it is Emily's relationship with Ariel that is the moral
epicenter, the heart, the justification of this film.  Ariel gets to do
a little growing himself, thanks in part to the temptations that Emily
offers him and which he finally decides to reject.  It has been
suggested that some Jews may be offended by the idea that the brilliant
and committed Ariel could ever be attracted to the rather vulgar and
concupiscent Emily.  Not being Jewish myself, I don't know, but it seems
realistically possible that Emily is so different from the traditional
and retiring Hasidic women that he would intrigued by the novelty she
represents.  His father, the great rebbe, played by Lee Richardson, is
himself caught up somewhat in Emily's verve and purpose; he tells her
tells her he has seen her soul, that they are alike, death-camp survivor
and cowboy cop, in their mutual knowledge of evil.  Once Emily tones
down her brassy clothes and hair to fit into the conversative community,
she still attracts a lot of attention, even a suitor, by virtue of her
dynamism.  Curiously, both Emily and Ariel find a deeper friendship and
their own strengths as they work through their mutual and forbidden
attractions.
     Eric Thal as Ariel is a wonderful discovery.  He's handsome, sexy,
intelligent, sensitive, confident, dynamic in his own way, and
irresistible.  Thal brings strength and mysticism to his role.  He is
emotional and completely manly.  His Ariel, as the otherwordly Hasidic
anachronism, is the paradoxically perfect 90s man.  I look forward to
seeing Thal in his next movie.
     There are two death scenes in this movie that represent departures
from the Hollywood norm.  In one criminals and cop are united for a
moment by the fear of death and the pity and tenderness the survivors
feel in the presence of death.  There is an extraordinary moment of
profound grief at the killing of the killer, something you will almost
never see in a Hollywood shoot-'em-up.
     I can recommend A STRANGER AMONG US, even with its largely
superfluous crime theme and its stereotypes, as a movie with a strong
moral center, with an intelligent friendship of a man and a woman, with
some interesting things to say about how we can live to be happy.  It is
a film worthy of its director and it is worth seeing, even at full
ticket price.

Title
Review for Cape Fear (1991)
     CAPE FEAR is a film directed by Martin Scorsese.  It stars Robert
DeNiro, Nick Nolte, Jessica Lane, and Juliette Lewis.  Rated R for
excessive violence.
     CAPE FEAR is a remake of J. Lee Thompson's 1962 Southern gothic
thriller.  Elmer Bernstein has adapted Bernard Herrmann's original
score, and three of the stars from the original have small roles in this
version: Gregory Peck, Robert Mitchum, and Martin Balsam.  This building
on the past may be one of the reasons why this version is such an
interesting film, not a film without problems, but a wonderful movie for
talking about.
     First, there are the remarkable performances by the principals, as
well as some excellent character acting by the likes of Joe Don Baker.
Most viewers may well dwell on Robert DeNiro's performance, and I'll
have something to say about DeNiro, too.  But the actor who impressed me
beyond any other in this movie was newcomer Juliette Lewis, who plays
the 15-year-old daughter of Nick Nolte's character.  She gave us a
letter-perfect teenage girl, totally convincing, psychologically real.
Her body language, her not-quite-beautiful prettiness, her speech
patterns, these were the stuff of flesh-and-blood teenagers, not
Hollywood stereotypes.  If Lewis can keep up this kind of quality, she
will have a good crack at being a major star in the next few years and
beyond.
     Then there's Jessica Lange, who plays Nolte's wife, Lewis's mother,
a woman on the verge of a nervous breakdown, a chain-smoking commercial
artist, a font of bitter zingers and violent rage.  I haven't seen Lange
in a long time and it was grand to see her turn in a first-rate
performance.
     Nick Nolte, looking fitter and handsomer than I've seen him in years,
reverses my expectations and plays the "good guy", a successful lawyer
who's made some mistakes in the past, playing a little too loosely with
the rules of the law and of marriage. His is a very difficult role; we
have to see that he is a victim, but one who has to some degree only
brought his troubles on himself. We sympathize, but we don't really
approve of or like him. It's only that the bystanders, his victims as
much as DeNiro's, who suffer, too, that let's us extended a sympathy to
him fully. Nolte, to his credit, pretty much pulls it off. He walks a
narrow plank and seldom loses his balance.
     Okay, DeNiro.  DeNiro is America's most distinguished, most
intense, most dedicated scenery-chewer, an actor who has no concept of
moderation or resting on his laurels.  The energy of the man is
awe-inspiring.  And the role of Cady, the ex-con who has come "to help"
his ex-lawyer, gives the fullest possible play to DeNiro's willingness
to overwhelm with excessiveness.  The most powerful, chilling parts of
CAPE FEAR are when Cady is only a threatening eminence, when the story
itself confines DeNiro's larger than life interpretation of a nearly
impossible character.  When script shifts into its ultra-violent second
half, DeNiro's Cady slips slightly into incredibility and loses a certain
Hannibal-Lectorish attractiveness.
     Far and away, the best scene in CAPE FEAR, the one that is sure to
remain when all other memories of the movie fade is the extended meeting
of Lewis and DeNiro in a darkened college theater on whose stage is a
Hansel and Gretel set of the witch's gingerbread house.  The lurking,
the expectations of unspeakable acts, the absurdity of the setting, the
appalling innocence of Lewis, the manipulative genius of DeNiro, and
above all the thumb, all these created a scene of tension and shuddery
apprehension that made it a stand-alone triumph.
     On the other hand, once the mayhem was well and truly underway, I
began to lose something of my involvement, a bad situation in any movie,
but especially a thriller.  Cady shows himself to be not only a genius
of manipulation and strategy, but physically indestructible.  I cannot
believe that any human, no matter how driven by his obsessions and no
matter how physically strong could have pulled off some of the stunts
Cady is supposed to have survived.
     The psychology of CAPE FEAR is fascinating and the real center of
the movie's successes.  And the moral questions that the story raises
are the center of its worthiness of being seen.  Unfortunately the movie
loses interest in these as it succumbs to a blood lust that all too
common in contemporary films.  The psychology, briefly put, involves the
relationships of the principal characters, the sorting out of
responsibility, of blame, of what's of real value.  The morality
concerns how we face up our responsibilities, what we have to do to
atone for our humanness.
     I recommend CAPE FEAR, but suggest you will get more of bang for
your buck by taking in a low-cost matinee.  It will grip you, but it may
leave you more dissatisfied than disquieted.

Title
Review for Newsies (1992)
     NEWSIES is a film directed and choreographed by Kenny Ortega.  The
songs are by Alan Menken and Jack Feldman.  It stars Christian Bale,
David Moscow, Luke Edwards, Robert Duvall, and Ann-Margaret.  It is
rated PG for mature themes.
     NEWSIES is a live-action musical from Walt Disney.  After Disney's
recent successes with animated musicals, also featuring Alan Menken as
co-composer, no doubt encouraged Disney to try to revive this mostly
moribund genre.  The result is a thorough enjoyable renewal of one of my
favorite forms.
     The story is based on an historical strike of newsboys, newsies, in
New York City in 1899 against Joseph Pulitzer.  There is, despite the
irony of Disney's own anti-union history, a moral quality behind the
leaping, flips, splits, and jumps that characterize the choreography, a
protest against the exploitation of children and the anyone helpless in
the face of money and power.  There's a lot of uplift in this musical,
so watch out.
     The music is excellent.  It advances the story rather than
interrupting it, it is tuneful, if you will, and it avoids both the
cliches of Andrew Lloyd Weber pseudo-operas and MTV dance videos.  The
director, Kenny Ortega, took on a big job in staging and filming several
very large, busy production numbers; this is his first directing job,
having been a choreographer only before, and some awkwardness is
inevitably apparent.  But still, he is more to be praised than cavilled.
It is by and large very impressive technically and artistically.
     The dance numbers are energetic, even athletic, as befits a cast of
young boys and teenagers, and heavily populated.  Christian Bale has one
solo dance number, which is charming and surprisingly good, with smaller
gestures and its own narrative vocabulary than the big production
numbers.  The performances are delivered with a fine conviction, a
purity, that won me over from the opening number.
     Christian Bale, by the way, is the wonderful boy star of Stephen
Spielberg's EMPIRE OF THE SUN (1987), who is mostly grown up to a
talented manhood now.  He is still a master of the mixed message, being
at once vulnerable and malevolent.  He backed up by David Moscow, a more
conventional kind of star, but still quite appealing in his own way.
Robert Duvall shows up sporting a patently false beard as Joseph
Pulitzer, whom Duvall brings to life through his vast and perceptive
treasury of shtick; in this case, Duvall accents Pulitzer's Jewishness
with a perhaps distracting repertoire of gestures right out of I
REMEMBER MAMA.  Of course, even Duvall can only do so much with a script
that largely reduces Pulitzer to two-dimensional villain.  The show is
rife with juicy villains and they provide a lot of the fun.
     One should also mention the appearance of Ann-Margaret as Medda the
Swedish Meadowlark.  She has a couple of numbers and gets to strut her
stuff behind a purple ostrich fan.
     On the technical side, a side I am barely competent to even refer
to, one has to be impressed by the detailed and authentic-looking sets
and costumes of fin-de-siecle New York, especially the Lower East Side.
But especially stunning are the mattes, especially one of the Brooklyn
Bridge that so amazing that it gets its own credit.  Surely, it will be
remembered next Oscartide.
     Disney deserves a lot of thanks for taking on the risking business
of reviving the live musical and in doing it in such a grand manner.  It
is not without reason that one of the persons particularly remembered in
the credits, along with Howard Ashman (Menken's late partner), is Gene
Kelly.
     I'm not saying the film is perfect, especially in the editing and
shooting of the dance scenes.  I am saying it's pretty darn good and
better than anything that's come along in a long while in this genre.
     If you like musicals, you will like NEWSIES, and you will gladly
pay whatever it takes to see it.  If you don't think you do like them,
you might want to risk a matinee ticket and give this one a try.  It
might very well surprise you.  It did me.

Title
Review for Father of the Bride (1991)
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE is a film directed by Charles Shyer.  It stars
Steve Martin, Diane Keaton, Kimberly Williams, with Martin Short.
     FATHER OF THE BRIDE is a remake of the 1950 classic of the same
name; the original, in turn based on a novel by Edward Streeter, and
directed by Vincente Minnelli, starred Spencer Tracy, Joan Bennett, and
Elizabeth Taylor, with Don Taylor as the groom.  The new film uses many
of the same scenes and even the original dialog (written by Frances
Goodrich and Albert Hackett).  The new one has a lot of laughs and good,
old-fashioned tears, but it doesn't quite work as well as the Spencer
Tracy version.
     For one thing, Steve Martin is no Spencer Tracy, or is that stating
the obvious?  Instead of bumbling warmth and endearing yet manly
clumsiness, we get treated to 45 or 60 minutes of THE JERK as Martin
tries not to deal with the prospect of his daughter getting married.
Martin's having a major cheap attack and maybe some sublimated sexual
jealousy.  I like Martin, but warm he ain't.
     For another, the two principal women characters are non-entities.
Joan Bennett provided wisdom, humor, and a guiding hand to that wedding
41 years ago.  Diane Keaton grins, smirks, and smiles mostly.  She has
one scene where she rather gently asserts herself, but mostly she comes
off as a money-spending machine.  Supposedly, she has her own career,
but the film is so uninterested in her as to never actually tell us what
that career might be.  (Bennett was the driving force behind the big
blow-out in the original--because she had missed out on a big wedding
for herself and was seizing a second chance through her daughter; Keaton
is mostly along for the ride.)
     Kimberly Williams, the bride to be, will never win in a blind
comparison with post-ingenue Elizabeth Taylor.  Taylor's bride wanted to
elope.  Williams' bride wants a $1200 wedding cake.  She's not a bad
sort, but she's not exactly the modern woman the film wants us to
believe she is.  She's going to be a great architect, she doesn't want
veal at the reception dinner (she's heard something), she calls the
wedding off for no better reason than Taylor called hers off.  On the
other hand, her one-on-one basketball is one of the best scenes in the
movie and we do have some reason to think there's more to her than a
well-thumbed copy of BRIDE'S MAGAZINE.  
     Martin Short plays the flamboyant wedding coordinator, playing  it
as an offensive cliche with an incomprehensible and obviously synthetic
accent.  His assistant is played by an actor whose name may be
W. D. Wong (apologies to all of Mr. Wong's fans if I've bolixed his
initials) with better grace and more authenticity.  The only good thing
about Short's performance, which is blown up beyond all reason to
accommodate his presence in the movie, is that Martin's reactions are
markedly less homophobic as the wedding plans proceed and Martin becomes
reconciled to hosting the most tasteless wedding ever seen in San
Marino, California.
     And really, this where the new movie most seriously fails us.
Upper middle class family spends $200,000 for daughter's wedding ($250
per person, over 500 guests) and no one feels anything is out of
proportion.  The groom's parents live in "real" mansion and offer to
help out, but no one offers to put the brakes on the Wedding from Hell
in the name of anything like common decency, only in the name of not 
wanting to have a wedding in the first place.  
     And there is, appropriately, a product placement for Spode.
     The best things about this new FATHER OF THE BRIDE are the love and
family feelings.  Ultimately, this is, after all, a tear-jerker.  We are
allowed to cry at weddings.  And we do.  All around me couples, moms and
dads, dates, were cuddling through the last sequence, people were
sniffling happily, and folks were feeling fine.  The next best thing is
Martin is pretty funny and does some of his great physical shtick.
     However, I cannot recommend it to you for more than cheap matinee
prices.  
     You might want to hunt the video of the Spencer Tracy version, too.
It is still a very watchable film with legendary stars and a great
director.

Title
Review for Alice (1990)
     Every year, just as winter peaks and begins to peter out into a
sloppy mess, Woody Allen redeems this most cheerless of seasons with a
new movie.  This year he gives us ALICE, which stars Mia Farrow and in
which Allen himself does not appear.  But, of course, Allen need hardly
appear physically in a Woody Allen film for his presence to dominate and
inform every scene.  His major presence in ALICE is that Mia Farrow has
begun to speak her lines exactly as Allen does, even to the point where
it becomes somewhat distracting.
     The title character, played brilliantly by Farrow, is a modern,
upper-crust, neurosis-ridden Manhattanite interpretation of the Lewis
Carrol Alice.  Farrow's Alice takes Chinese herbs with a lot more
various effects that the old "one side makes you taller" routine of the
Caterpillar.  The herbalist/acupuncturist is played by Keye Luke, who
long ago and in a different world was, I believe, No.  1 Son in the the
Charlie Chan series.  Everywhere Alice goes there are looking glasses in
background.  This Alice is an innocent on the cusp of discovering
herself.
     Her husband is a cold, patronizing, and treacherous William Hurt.
Her lover is Joe Mantegna.  Mantegna's performance is particularly good,
being the only actor in the movie who has chance of stealing the lead
from Farrow.  Julie Kavner, Bernadette Peters, and Cybil Shepherd have
minor roles; the wealth of Allen is staggering if he can afford to
underuse such major character actors as Kavner (who is also appearing
AWAKENINGS currently) and Peters (who has never had a good movie, but
for whom hope springs eternal).  
     Gwen Verdon, who was the fabulous dancer/singer who starred as 
Lola in DAMN YANKEES long time passing (remember "Whatever  Lola Wants,
Lola Gets (and, Little Man, Lola Wants You)"?),  appears as Alice's
mother, who had a short career in the movies  before she drank herself
to death with Margaritas ("But,  darling, you know I never could resist
anything with salt on  the rim.").
     Allen, by the way, does us all a major service when he finds and
uses some otherwise nearly forgotten of star of other years.  In NEW
YORK STORIES, the woman who played his mother was the original voice of
Betty Boop, for example.
     (I read this last week a description of Hurt grabbing Mantegna and
dancing around in a circle yelling "We're going to do a Woody, we're
going to do a Woody!")
     Too much praise for Farrow's accomplishment is not possible.  She
brings a guileless honesty to her role, a deadpan serious to the hijinks
and fantasy that makes them all the more delightful.  In many ways,
ALICE marks Farrow's emergence as a major film actor.
     Another reliable feature of Allen films is the music.  Allen is
well-known to be a major, major jazz aficionado, who, like Mantegna's
character, Joe, plays the sax and who has a record collection that is
reliably described as fantastic.  The sound track of ALICE features some
well chosen selections from such a collection, including "Alice Blue
Gown" and that one about Old Chinatown.
     Unfortunately, I do not think the movie per se is as good as its
performers.  The fantasy elements are handled well, but my own class
prejudices are such that I have trouble being too sympathetic toward
upper-class angst.  My prejudices aside, the ending of the film is
horribly, disfiguringly hurried and left me with a very unsatisfied
feeling.
     Briefly, I have to say that ALICE is major Farrow, but minor Allen.
But then, as others have remarked, a second-rate Allen movie is better
than just about anyone else's first-rate movie.

Title
Review for Prelude to a Kiss (1992)
     PRELUDE TO A KISS is a film directed by Norman Rene, from a
screenplay by Craig Lucas.  It stars Alec Baldwin, Meg Ryan, Sydney
Walker, with Kathy Bates, Patty Duke, and Ned Beatty.  Rated PG-13, due
to language.
     PRELUDE TO A KISS suffers from coming so late in the nearly
exhausted cycle of body-switching comedies that infested the movie
screens in the 80s, the best being probably BIG, the most profitable
GHOST, the most ill-timed PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED, the most sleazy one
that escapes my mind just now but was a remake of a 60s sleazoid comedy
about a sleazeball who comes back as a woman [SWITCH -Mod.].  By now,
most of us have had about all we want of this particular subgenre for
the next few years.  This is unfortunate because PRELUDE is a sweet,
likable film with some winning performances.  The story is also a
little thin and would have benefited from some interesting subplot,
such as one exploiting the charming performance by the man who plays
Peter's (Alec Baldwin) best friend.  I think Peter's friend is gay, not
because he kisses Peter just before the wedding but because of
something in the dialog about the friend never getting married.
     In fact one of the most interesting and successful aspects of
PRELUDE is the skillful and sensitive way it handles the homosexual
tensions inherent in the situation, to wit an old man's soul in a young
woman's body and vice versa.  It's true that the script descends into
smirking humor once or twice, principally when Sydney Walker in his own
body and "in Meg Ryan's," as it were, goes out of his way to say that
Baldwin wasn't to his taste as a lover.  On the other, and more
convincing hand, we are presented with some intimate moments and one
very tender kiss between Walker and Baldwin.  By comparison look at the
tricky way GHOST avoided showing us Whoopi Goldberg being kissed by a
woman (again).
     This is the pleasantest role I've seen Baldwin in.  He is quirky,
sexy, sensitive, passionately devoted to getting at the truth about his
wife's change in character and to righting a great wrong.  He expresses
tender emotions lightly and convincingly and his finely tuned
performance anchors the movie.
     Meg Ryan is a good choice for the bohemian, darkly figured Rita,
who is so afraid of life that she can barely restrain her love of death.
Ryan is appealing and quite comfortable with what is effectively a dual
role.
     The showiest performance, and the one that may be remembered at
Oscar time, is Walker's.  The bitter, dying, absent old man who
rediscovers the preciousness of life, even a dying life.  He has a
couple of powerful speeches that are the moral center of this film.
     The film is adapted from a stage play, which is probably why it is
talkier than most movies, given to speeches more than dialog.  No
throw-away lines here; every word is to a purpose.  Otherwise, the
transition from stage to screen is mostly seamless and more successful
than most such adaptations.
     Mention also ought to be made of the fine, but brief supporting
roles from Kathy Bates as Walker's daughter, from Ned Beatty and Patty
Duke as Ryan's parents.
     The moments of all-out magic may be not as magical on the screen as
on the stage, but the rest of this story is handled mostly convincingly
thanks to the excellence of the actors and some sensitive direction from
Norman Rene, the director of the 1989 AIDS drama, LONG TIME COMPANION.
     I recommend PRELUDE to anyone with a taste for the romantic, the
life-affirming, for the witty and erotic.  This is a charmer and I very
much enjoyed it even at full ticket price.

Title
Review for Russia House, The (1990)
     THE RUSSIA HOUSE (I may slip and call this the Russian House
somewhere in the course of this notice--I once lived in a
Russian-language-only institute call Russian House and the habit is
ingrained, I fear) stars Sean Connery and Michelle Pfeiffer with Klaus
Maria Brandauer and Roy Scheider inter alia; it is based on a novel by
John LeCarre of the same name.
     This is touted as LeCarre's first post-Cold War suspense
novel-cum-movie, and so it may be; but alas Cold War (pre-, post-, or
amid) thriller have never been my preferred reading genre and I have not
had the pleasure of any of LeCarre's efforts.  However, I have seen
movies based on his works, THE SPY WHO CAME IN FROM THE COLD staying
especially in the memory.  And my memory is that as stories they were
pretty well muddled affairs and my impression has been that they did not
translate the novels into film well.
     I think it is possible LeCarre and his readers have been better
served in THE RUSSIA HOUSE.  The screenplay was written by Tom Stoppard,
a very respectable writer in his own right.  Certainly, I was left with
none of the "well, somebody did something to somebody, that much is
clear at any rate" (as Alice said after hearing the "Jabberwocky")
feeling I've felt in the past in the face of this cloak-and-dagger
tomfoolery.
     Here, instead, I have a pretty straightforward kind of story, with
a beginning, a middle, and an end.  This is not to say it doesn't have
its surprises, twists, turns, and suspense.  It's just that here the
theme is crystal clear throughout: loyalty.  People's loyalties are
tested, defined, and put the test.  The final loyalty, the one the film
endorses ultimately, is typical of our post-CW sensibility, and I for
one am glad to see it.
     As to the performances, Connery, Pfeiffer, and company do good
solid, yeomanlike work.  I don't think anybody really sails here, but no
one does a pratfall either.  In some ways, Connery's performance could
be the most suspect insofar as he turns one of his standard
curmudgeons-with-a-heart-of-gold interpretations; but the man has such
presence, such command of the screen, that it is hard not to just bathe
in it gratefully even though I did not find him nearly as disreputable
in the beginning as he should have been, nor his transformation nearly
so graduated as it could have been.  
     Pfeiffer in so ways takes more chances with her role as Katya, the
go-between, the Russian woman who loves both Brandauer the great
scientist and Connery the sodden British publisher.  For one thing, she
does a pretty creditable Russian accent and speaks a little Russian here
and there in a not embarrassing way as near as this former student of
Russian can detect.
     Among the supporting players, Brandauer and Scheider are the most
familiar to me.  For those of us who have seen COLONEL REDL, all other
Brandauer performances seem footnotes; but I can't think of film that
hasn't been better for his presence (especially the worse ones, like OUT
OF AFRICA).  I was just wondering to myself the other day what Roy
Scheider was doing these days.  Here he plays the CIA bigshot and does a
good job of being alternately (or simultaneously) a jerk and a
gentleman.  James Fox plays his British counterpart (at Russia House)
and does a fine turn.  His real purpose appears to be slimy in just such
a civil way as puts the upstart Yanks in their place.
     One of the real draws of THE RUSSIA HOUSE is the wonderful location
photography, especially that in Moscow and Leningrad.  This must be the
first Western thriller that was shot in the Soviet Union instead of
using Helsinki as a stand-in (see GORKY PARK, for example).
Fascinating, revealing and gorgeous, used to great effect throughout.
Fred Schepisi, the director, and the production people, especially the
director of photography, Ian Baker, ought to be in line for some
appropriate recognition in this area.
     I have no problem in recommending THE RUSSIAN HOUSE to anyone who
doesn't mind quite a lot of rough language.  There's no nudity, no open
sex, no graphic violence, but oh the language.

Title
Review for American Me (1992)
     AMERICAN ME is a film by Edward James Olmos.  It was written by
Floyd Mutrux and Desmond Nakano.  It stars Olmos, William Forsythe, Pepe
Serna, Evelina Fernandez.  It is rated R for scenes of extreme violence.
     AMERICAN ME is one of the darkest, grimmest, most unrelenting, and
challenging movies I have ever seen.  Honestly, I dreaded its start and
only went in the first place because Lyndol insisted.  And I have to say
that I was completely captivated by the honesty and skill in its making.
And I also have to say I would never volunteer to sit through it again.
As Eliot said, "Humankind cannot stand too much reality."
     This is the story of Santana, wonderfully played by Olmos, and of
his friends, family, and community in the barrio of East Los Angeles.
Santana is a ruthless killer who organizes a gang in Folsom state
penitentiary.  He convinces himself and others that his purpose is to
help his people, but in the end he comes to realize that his real goal
was power.
     The violence begins with the Zoot Suit Riots of wartime L.A. and
continues without intermission to the very end.  We are forced to face
up to the horrors of rape (man-on-woman and man-on-man), stabbings,
stranglings, burning alive, mutilation, and the rest of the catalog.
But the violence is all to a single purpose and entirely free of all
imputations of exploitation.  Olmos sees his movie strictly in didactic
terms as a cautionary tale to young Santanas out there today.  Olmos
wants to show us how desperate the powerless are for respect (a theme
that figures in one scene of the diametrically opposite GRAND CANYON,
btw).  He launches a full-scale assault on the cult of machismo.  And he
scares the hell of me and depresses me with the hopelessness of the
cycle in a way few movies or documentaries have ever reached me.
     Olmos achieved his first recognition in the Miami Vice TV series
and then with his portrayal of East L.A. math teacher Jaime Escalante
in STAND AND DELIVER, which role earned him an Oscar nomination.  Olmos
is a powerful performer, who bears an uncanny resemblance to Humphrey
Bogart in his acne-pitted and scarred face and his style of acting.
     The ensemble acting by the mostly unfamiliar ethic performers is
fresh, original, and forceful.  Especially to be commended are William
Forsythe as JD and Pepe Serna as Mundo, Santana's closest henchmen, and
Evelina Fernandez as the woman who sees most clearly who Santana is.
     I can also recommend the editing of AMERICAN ME, which at times
created in me an almost unbearable tension, as in a sequence that cuts
between Santana on the outside on his first romantic encounter and a
group of inmates on the inside moving along to a nearly unsupportable
and horrifying climax that is simultaneously echoed to only a slighter
degree on the outside.  If it helps, you might try focusing on the
technical excellence of this film, which is first rate.
     I recommend AMERICAN ME to you.  (The title is drawn from Beatrice
Griffith's 1947 study of Mexican-American "Pachuco" culture.)  The movie
will rattle your cage, disturb your sureties, and reward you with a
rare, if harrowing, movie experience of real substance.  But be warned:
"Abandon all hope," etc.

Title
Review for Woman's Tale, A (1991)
     A WOMAN'S TALE is an Australian film directed by Paul Cox and
written by Paul Cox and Barry Dickins.  It stars Sheila Florance, Gosia
Dobrowolskia, Chris Haywood, and Norman Kaye.  Unrated.
     A WOMAN'S TALE, a film that moved from the Seattle International
Film Festival to a local theatrical run, blurs the line between fiction
and documentary to the point where we the audience cannot say that
anything we see on the screen happened to Sheila Florance, the
80-year-old Australian actress, or to the character she plays in this
her final performance.  Both were dying of cancer as the film was made.
Both apparently are feisty, sweet, in love with life with all its
sadness, thoughtful, and mean to the petty and to those who have lost
sight of life.  However neither she or her character is the frightful
old lady of TATIE DANIELLE or the cute eccentric of HAROLD AND MAUDE.
She is one of a kind, the fictive she as well as the real she.
     We have a traditional, rather straight-forward plot about an aging,
dying woman, whose landlord wants to move someone more lucrative into
her memory-filled apartment, whose fretful son wants to move her into a
nursing home "for her own good," whose visiting nurse has become her
surrogate daughter, whose friends include a 90-year-old woman who is as
fluffy as her white hair and a senile ex-military man.  His death sparks
a crisis in her own life.  This appears to be fiction.
     But the core of interest for us in the character and person of
Sheila Florance.  She appears to be playing herself, her memories appear
to be her character's -- as when she remembers the Blitz and dogfights
and body parts raining out of the sky and the death of her infant
daughter.  Her anger at war, her inconsolable, lifelong grief, her joy
in life, her wit, her theatrical, rather Tallulah-Bankheadish
mannerisms.  On this level, A WOMAN'S TALE is a one-woman theater piece.
One thing is certain in all the peekaboo is that Florance was a
performer of extraordinary courage and honesty.  Her scene of taking a
bath -- how many of us have even seen a naked woman of her age?  -- in
which she not only reveals her outer self, the sunken flesh, the fallen
breasts, that amazing wide mouth stripped of its lipstick, the eyes so
bright and lively elsewhere closed and unseeing in the dim bathroom, but
even more devastatingly she reveals the inner terror and sadness of
being old and alone with her memories, her losses, her tears.  She
grants us a unique gift in her dying to preserve and reveal who and what
she was.  You rejoice that you get to know this much of her now even you
regret you never knew her when she was alive.
     Florance is so compelling a personality that it is easy to lose
sight of the writer-director Paul Cox, a Dutch-born Australian whose
career ranges from a documentary about Van Gogh (VINCENT) to a gentle
love story (LONELYHEARTS) to a comedy about voyeurism (MAN OF FLOWERS)
to a divorce drama (MY FIRST WIFE).  He first saw Florance on stage in
the 60s, when they became friends.  He has the good sense to pretty much
hand his film over to Florance.  But Cox also respects the lesser
characters in his story, even the fluffy old lady who prattles endlessly
about cliched messages in nature.  Despite the source, there is an
underlying wisdom even in the cliches and Cox returns to the source
again and again in recurring (and final) images of moving water.  Even
the bitchy queens who live below Martha (Florance's character) and who
covet her apartment are redeemed at the right moment; exactly why they
had to be a gay couple to be bitches and unpleasant neighbors seems to
me the only gratuitously mean note in the film.
     Sheila Florance died last fall, a few days after receiving an
Australian Film Institute award for this work.  Because of the film, she
lives on.  I high recommend that you do what needs to be done to make
her acquaintance.  She will repay you many times over.

Title
Review for Unforgiven (1992)
     UNFORGIVEN is film directed and produced by Clint Eastwood, from a
script by David Webb Peoples.  It stars Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Morgan
Freeman, Richard Harris, and Jaimz Woolvett.  Rated R for violence.
     UNFORGIVEN is just short of being a perfect film.  I say this as a
person who has never liked Clint Eastwood either personally or
professionally.  I suppose this is a kind of come-back film for
Eastwood, who has littered the past decade of a string of ever worsening
embarrassments.  Viewers who are more familiar with Eastwood than I tell
me this may be the best film of his career.  It is certainly the best
Hollywood Western in the last twenty-one years, since McCABE AND MRS.
MILLER.
     The story -- bounty hunters, aging badmen, foolish newcomer,
sadistic sheriff, vengeful prostitutes, the shootout -- borrows elements
(ONE-EYED JACKS, THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN) and its end-of-the-West mood
(THE WILD BUNCH, THE SHOOTIST, and RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY) from
distinguished classic Westerns.  The story is dark and ultra-violent,
yet funny in places, and thought-provoking throughout.  It is also
intense and emotionally charged throughout its 131 minute running time.
     I've seen UNFORGIVEN (not to be confused, by the way, with John
Huston's 1960 Western THE UNFORGIVEN) described as a revisionist
Western.  Yes, but that seems unduly limiting to me.  I see this film as
an assault, if that's the word, on the machismo cult of the West and by
extension the Western world.  The script, by David Webb Peoples (BLADE
RUNNER), leisurely establishes a rich cast of characters, complexly
conceived, in a situation that has to lead to its violent, sad, and
unsatisfying conflict.  In the process, characters like Eastwood's
renascent pig farmer have ample opportunity to reflect on the meaning
and effects of violence.
     Then, too, the idea that UNFORGIVEN debunks the myth of the
frontier, as Kevin Costner's DANCES WITH WOLVES deliberately set about
debunking the role of Native Americans in film, is too simplistic for
the reason that Eastwood's film even while it does set up each and every
relevant convention only to knock it down with a shot of realism
simultaneously celebrates the things we have always loved most about the
Western: loyalty, honor, courage, and the harsh and unfinished beauty of
the country.
     The photography of Jack N. Green and the sets designed by Henry
Bumstead make this the most visually evocative of Eastwood's films.  The
film was shot in Alberta, standing in for Kansas and Wyoming.  The spare
score of Lennie Niehaus adds its own support to the goings on in an
entirely consonant fashion.
     Eastwood has proved that as a director he can be both tasteful and
generous, and he knows how to stick to the point.  The film never
wanders or loses its way; every scene contains the central conflict of
abhoring and loving the Western.  There are no gratuitous scenes; the
entire movie, for all its length and its big feeling, is spare and
economical.  It is also informed by a gentle, not un-self-mocking humor
based on the characters.  Eastwood gives ample showcase scenes to his
other old-timer stars -- Freeman, Hackman, and Harris -- who never let
him down.  I haven't liked Hackman so much for years, and Richard Harris
as the scene-chewing, egotistical gunfighter English Bob makes his
portion of the film uniquely his own.  Freeman's role does bother me
slightly; not that Morgan Freeman isn't every bit as good as ever, but
that no one ever mentions his race in this highly racist time; this is a
modern sensitivity that jars with the general sense of "this is the way
things really were" that otherwise pervades UNFORGIVEN.  Eastwood also
is generous in introducing the newcomer (at least new to me) Jaimz
Woolvett as the Schofield Kid, a comic but moving clown of a
killer-wannabe.  I can also recommend the supporting part of the writer
of penny-dreadfuls played by Saul Rubinek; this part seems particularly
ripe in its potential for interpretation as a symbol for the
mythologizing of the West.
     Eastwood's own performance is nonpareil.  For the first time, he
appears as a grizzled, broken, often weak, wholly human old guy.  He
can't mount his horse, he can't shoot straight, he's haunted by his own
past.  It is even possible that there has been some justification for
the iconic cult of Eastwood all these years, that I was wrong to dismiss
him.  He is certain to be nominated for Best Actor next winter, and he
may well deserve to win.
     There is so much to like about UNFORGIVEN -- such as the treatment
of prostitution and the performances of Frances Fisher and Anna Thompson
as the angriest of the whores -- that it is more than worthy of several
viewings.  You would be fully justified to pay premium prices to see
UNFORGIVEN.

Title
Review for AlienÅ (1992)
     ALIEN 3 is a film directed by David Fincher, from a script by David
Giler, Walter Hill, and Larry Ferguson.  It stars Sigourney Weaver,
Charles S. Dutton, Paul McGann, and Lance Henriksen.  Rated R, for
violence, language.
     ALIEN 3 is, of course, the latest sequel to 1979's ALIEN, a
landmark movie in its genre that scared the living daylights out of us
all and has had us coming back for more for 13 years.  ALIEN was poetic,
scary, and innovative.  ALIENS (1986) was the roller-coaster ride
through hell.  ALIEN 3 is grim, monochromatic, neither as scary nor as
fast-paced as its predecessors.  And yet, it's a lot better than I had
been led to expect.
     Someone tell us the story of how David Fincher, an MTV veteran, got
the assignment to do this very expensive, potentially very lucrative
film.  It turns out to be an interesting choice since the editing style
and the photography appear to me to be highly influenced by the music
video style.  Some film student should have a lot of fun writing this
one up.  I don't have the name of photographer here, but I must say I
intensely enjoyed the photography in this film, there being times when
it takes on a life of its own, quite apart from the action.  I'm
thinking a shot of sprinklers that look like ballerinas in ankle-length
tutus, from which point on I became almost distractingly aware of the
photography.
     The story has a couple of interesting twists to it that ought to
appeal to veterans of the series.  And the supporting players are an
interesting bunch.  With everybody's head shaved, one concentrates on
the faces more, and they an interesting lot of faces, not very pretty
for the most part, but very interesting.  Sigourney Weaver is pretty
much the whole show, but a couple of the others come perilously close to
upstaging here once or twice.
     John Hartl in the Seattle Times made the interesting observation
that the film is a metaphor about disease.  After comparing it to NO
EXIT or last year's POISON as a Hollywood version of trapped people
with no defenses, he mentions that if the first film was about cancer,
this one is about AIDS.  There is a "vow of celibacy that also includes
women."  There are complaints about the lack of condoms and characters
says things like: "I'm sorry you've got this thing inside you" and "I
don't have much time, I'm dead already."  This is a metaphor, remember,
but one with a lot of resonance for me.
     If you're a fan of the series, you will see ALIEN 3 regardless of
what I say, so it hardly matters that I think you ought to, even at full
price.  If you're not one of the converted, you might want to give it a
go at matinee rates.  It has its points.

Title
Review for Medicine Man (1992)
     MEDICINE MAN is a film directed by John McTiernan, from a script by
Tom Schulman and Sally Robinson.  The film stars Sean Connery, Lorraine
Bracco.  Cinematography is by Donald McAlpine and musical score by Jerry
Goldsmith.  Rated PG-13 for strong language, nudity.
     MEDICINE MAN suffers from two slight weaknesses: clumsy,
heavy-handed direction by John McTiernan, who has made his reputation
with thrillers like DIE HARD and THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; and the
brainless script by Tom Schulman and Sally Robinson.  Schulman, who
wrote the script for DEAD POETS SOCIETY, reportedly got $3 million for
the story idea.  The film overall cost around $40 million dollars.  And
except for the beautiful location photography, Andrew Vajna, the
producer, and Hollywood Pictures, the Disney unit that released it, did
not get much for their money.
     There is an enormous hole in the plot.  The only people who don't
see the obvious solution half-way through the film are the two
principals, who are supposed the Great Scientists.  Instead, they are
the Great Clueless.  Also, I found the idea that anything could cause
tumors to vanish overnight entering the realm of science fiction of a
very decidedly non-hardcore type.
     Lorraine Bracco, as Dr. Rae Crane and who was an interesting
character actress in GOODFELLAS, fails to connect with Sean Connery.
Her character is alternately abrasively independent or anachronistically
spoiled, withering, a city girl-scientist who screams at snakes and who
won't share the swimming hole with the village children.  One minute
she's demanding to be accepted as Connery's new research assistant, and
the next she's demanding to be allow to return to the City.  I read that
Vajna explicitly said the idea behind the film was to recreate the
unique chemistry of the 1951 classic THE AFRICAN QUEEN -- comedy, jungle
adventure, and the attraction of opposites.  In view of the results, we
can safely conclude that Bracco is no Katherine Hepburn.
     As for Connery, in the role of Dr. Robert Campbell, this may be
his worst film since the 1979 METEOR.  It is obvious that he is having
no fun with his role, and even more obvious that he is trying to Act.  I
note that he is credited with being executive producer for this film.
Mind you, bad Connery is still pretty good, and he has his moments.  But
the set-up, grumpy, misogynistic, anti-social, out-of-touch, and
over-the-hill boy-genius with an excessive taste for native hootch and
angst, is hackneyed and uninspired at best.
     The best part of the movie is the work of the cinematographer
McAlpine, especially a voyage through the canopy of the rain forest by
rope and pulley.  Goldsmith's music is pleasant -- a hint of samba
played on steel drum.
     Overall, I'd recommend that unless you have to see Sean Connery's
every movie you would be just as well off to give MEDICINE MAN a miss.
Maybe as a cheap video rental, but it is only marginally worth the price
of a matinee ticket.

Title
Review for Thelma & Louise (1991)
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a film by Ridley Scott and stars Geena Davis
and Susan Sarandon as the title characters.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a great film, undoubtedly one of the ten best
films that will be released in 1991, a film that may well find a place
on the 100-best list of films I have ever seen.  I kid you not.
     However, if you don't know already, the advertising campaign is
very misleading, giving many people the impression that THELMA AND
LOUISE is a light-headed road picture, a kind of Hope and Crosby with
breasts.  This is a very black comedy, and whether one finds it
ultimately depressing or uplifting is going to be a very personal
reaction.
     Myself, I was enormously cheered by this movie, especially by its
blackness, by its anger and rage, and by its absolute insistence on a
certain kind of life.
     The film looks like a Ridley Scott film, with its black wet
streets, but it feels more personal than more of his that I've seen.
     Geena Davis is absolutely marvelous as Thelma, who begins as a kind
of girl-woman running away from home on a spree and who ends up a human
being, a woman who knows herself and the world, a woman in control, a
woman willing to make a decision, a commitment.  That mobile face, that
almost prehensile mouth are exploited here to their full potential.
Davis pulls out all the stops to create her Thelma and it works.
     However, good as Davis is, Susan Sarandon may be even better.  In
some ways her character is more complex because so much about Louise
remains a mystery she won't talk about.  First she's the mother, then
the daughter, then the sister, the partner to Thelma, and through it all
is strength and knowledge that win through to acceptance.  It's a
powerful characterization and one that shines even more brightly when
one realizes that Sarandon also has to be Davis's second banana, her
straight woman.  Davis gets most of the laughs.  Sarandon got my heart.
     I think some people are going complain about a certain
one-sidedness in the men's roles.  It's true that Thelma's husband is
the one of the most astonishing pig to ever pop a brew, it's true the
foul-mouthed trucker is only technically a hominid, it's true the
trooper is a Hitler Youth with shit in his britches.  But Louise's
boyfriend, without being an Alan-Alda sensitive guy, is a real mensch,
and I suspect the cop who's heading the investigation (Harvey Keitel)
falls in love with both women even while having to catch them.
     There is some silliness in the movie.  For example, no one ever
seems to have heard of shrapnel or everyone carries a personal force
field in case of exploding tanker trailers.  And another poster has
caught a continuity error.  For some reason, I almost never catch these.
     And you may, or may not, have a problem with the conclusion THELMA
AND LOUISE comes to about women in a male-dominated society.  I think
the inevitability of what happens makes ideological concerns largely to
one side.
     Another poster also addressed the derivativeness of the ending.
This is not a problem for me.  The fact that THELMA AND LOUISE is about
*women* makes that other movie's ending beside the point, too.  In fact,
if you want to talk about antecedents, let's talk about Goldie Hawn's
wonderful SUGARLAND EXPRESS.  That is the movie that THELMA AND LOUISE
most resembles for me.
     Honestly, Davis and Sarandon are so overwhelming, any objections
pale to mere bagatelles in my humble opinion.

Title
Review for Indochine (1992)
     INDOCHINE is a French movie by Regis Wargnier.  It stars Catherine
Deneuve, Vincent Perez, and Linh Dan Pham.  Rated PG-13 for violence.
In French with English subtitles.
     INDOCHINE is a luscious epic set in the French Indochina of the
1930s to 1954 (when the French withdrew from Southeast Asia).  The whole
production is built around the legendary French star Catherine Deneuve.
She plays Eliane the icy owner of rich rubber-tree plantations who has
adopted an orphaned Annamese princess, Camille, played by Linh Dan Pham.
The story focuses on Eliane's life as she has to deal with a changing
Vietnam, starting to stir with nationalism and communism, and with a
corrupted and cruel colonial establishment.  Eliane sees herself as an
Asian, born on her father's estates, never having been to France, but
the Vietnamese see her somewhat differently.  Fortunately, the story
does not give us only Vietnam as seen by Eliane.  For a large middle
segment, Eliane recedes into the background as the story follows the
travels and tribulations of Camille, whose search for personal freedom
is a symbol for the parallel national experience.
     The director and co-writer, Regis Wargnier, has taken on a huge
territory to conquer in two and a half hours, the last twenty years of
France's Indochinese empire, the personal stories of two exceptionally
strong women and the young French naval officer (Vincent Perez) who
figures most importantly in both their lives.  As grand epic, INDOCHINE
is a qualified success.  Wargnier does not quite achieve a GONE WITH THE
WIND or DR. ZHIVAGO.  He is not working with an established literary
property, for one thing, and so lacks some of the structure and
direction of the Hollywood models.  But even with a certain
indecisiveness and wandering, INDOCHINE does manage to impress us
enormously as a visual epic.  Wargnier has gone out of his way to show
us a Vietnam that most of us had no idea existed -- enormously varied
terrains and landscapes, glimpses of traditional Vietnamese
civilization, a land of power and beauty.
     Then, too, Wargnier is blessed with one of the world's greatest
woman stars, Catherine Deneuve.  Deneuve doesn't make many movies these
days that get released in the U.S.  and the most recent film of any
distinction I could find a reference to was SCENE OF THE CRIME (1987;
directed by Andre Techine); in the Eighties she also allowed herself to
appear in such dubious understakings as the vampire film THE HUNGER.
Her greatest period was the Sixties, when she made some of the European
modern classics:  UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG, BELLE DE JOUR, REPULSION, to
name three.  In any case, it is wonderful to see her again in a film
completely worthy of her presence and one that fully exploits that pure
iciness that has been fascinating her fans at least since Roman
Polanski's 1965 film.  She is ideal for the part of Eliane -- mature,
sensuous, in control, strong, and deeply loving, deeply sad.  She
embodies all that the French achieved and lost in Indochina, the best
and worst of colonialism.
     Linh Dan Pham is fully up to her part as Eliane's adopted daughter,
Camille, who begins as a 16-year-old schoolgirl, the heir apparent of
her dead parents princely estates and Eliane's own kingdom of
plantations and houses.  We have a charming scene of mother and daughter
learning the tango together.  We also have Camille taking her life into
her own hands and setting on on her own epic journey of self-discovery.
Linh Dan Pham is a marvelous actor and an amazingly beautiful woman, the
ideal co-star for Deneuve.
     The third leading actor in INDOCHINE is Vincent Perez, the French
naval officer whose own odyssey is fully as strange and unexpected as
either of the women.  Perez is a fine actor and his scenes with Linh Dan
Pham are full of powerful emotions finely shaded.
     I do have one rather large cavil: there is no reference to World
War II anywhere in the film.  It is my understanding that a Vichy
administration maintained a nominal control until March, 1945, when the
Japanese imprisoned the French military and ordered the three parts of
Indochina to declare their independence.  The chronology of events in
the film is slippery and vague, except for the end.  As I say this is
really my only criticism.
     I highly recommend INDOCHINE to you, even at full ticket price.
Stunning photography, fascinating locales, high appealing stars and
supporting actors, and a history that is all too unfamiliar, considering
most recent events.  

Title
Review for Playboys, The (1992)
     THE PLAYBOYS is a film directed by Gillies Mackinnon from a
screenplay by Shane Connaughton and Kerry Crabbe.  It stars Aidan Quinn,
Robin Wright, Albert Finney, and Milo O'Shea.  Rated PG-13 for mature
themes and humor.
     THE PLAYBOYS is a Irish charmer, co-written by the author of MY
LEFT FOOT, Shane Connaughton, and filmed in the author's home village,
Redhills, employing the local people.
     Unfortunately, it appears as if the film was rather clumsily edited
down to a commercial running time, so that some of the subplots appear
to have been abruptly abandoned before they were resolved.
     The main story is a romance between an independent, unwed mother
(the year is 1957 and the village is not pleased by the woman's refusal
to name the father, much less marry him) and an itinerant player, whose
company The Playboys settles in for a week's stay in the village green.
The mother, Tara, is played the American actress, Robin Wright, whose
previous credits include the PRINCESS BRIDE.  The player, Tom, is played
by Aidan Quinn.  The romantic story proceeds more or less predictably
for these two: she initially repulses him, he perseveres.  The spoiler
in the village police Sgt.  Hegarty, played by Albert Finney, who also
has plans for Tara.
     The theme of the film is probably more interesting than the
romance, just as the acting by all the professional performers raises
the whole film above its own shortcomings.  The theme is change.  The
village priest is against it.  "Change is a dangerous thing," he warns.
All change is inherently bad, but the village, like Ireland and the
world, is changing despite his maledictions and clumsy opposition.
Television here, as in last year's AVALON, marks the end of the old
ways.  We see the first antenna being erected over the village pub,
"high up in the air, where the pictures are."  Tara's personal morality
is also a mark of change; for it is easier for us in the audience to
understand her actions than it is for us to understand the anachronistic
villagers.  The priest and the villagers try to shame into conforming to
their narrow ideas.  One of the women asks, "Who's the father?"  "Ask
your husbands," Tara replies.  They tell her that until she marries the
father, bad times are going to plague the village and indeed a local
tragedy is laid directly at her feet.
     As subplots, we have Tara as a smuggler and black marketeer and we
have a mystery about an IRA bomber operating in the locale.  Neither of
these is resolved at the end of the movie, but they certainly are part
and parcel of the theme of change.
     Despite this, the actors give us some fine performances, and no one
better than Albert Finney, who is one of the great actors of the
English-language cinema.  As a man in enormous pain and conflict, a man
seeking salvation and forgiveness, he makes an unsympathetic character
understandable and forgivable, if not quite likeable.
     Another fine performance is turned in Milo O'Shea as The Playboys'
impresario and lead, vain, ridiculous, as myopic as the priest in his
own way, bravely carrying the tradition of the provincial troupe, a
tradition soon to be extinguished by the advent of TV.  The Playboys'
performance provide with some wonderful comedy, btw, especially their
hastily improvised version -- a send-up if only they knew it -- GONE
WITH THE WIND, which is playing in the local cinema.
     The script captures the writer's native village -- its cadences,
its worldview, its blindnesses, its superstitions (what do we make of a
miracle in the show tent?).  It likes these people without overly
romanticizing them.  And it's as rich with Irish humor as it is with
their insularity and pettiness.
     THE PLAYBOYS is a lightweight, but charming, film that I can
cheerfully recommend to you even at full price.
     (In the Seattle area, THE PLAYBOYS is playing at five theaters,
Guild 45th, Alderwood, Renton Village, Seatac 12 South, and Kirkland
Parkplace.)

Title
Review for Paradise (1991)
     PARADISE is a film written and directed by Mary Agnes Donoghue.  It
stars Melanie Griffith, Don Johnson, Elijah Wood, Thora Birch, and
Sheila McCarthy.
     PARADISE is a remake of Jean-Loup Hubert's autobiographical 1987
French film LE GRAND CHEMIN.  This is Touchstone's (read Disney's) third
remake of a French film (the other two being THREE MEN AND A BABY (from
TROIS HOMMES ET UN COUFFIN) and THREE FUGITIVES (from LES FUGITIFS).
PARADISE is the most successful of the three, although the Disney people
have some very odd ideas of how people live in the country.
     What makes PARADISE more successful is the degree to which it
remains faithful to the French original aided by the surprising
performances turned in by Griffith and Johnson.  The story is simple,
spare, told in small scenes that exist without explanation or comment.
This stands in contrast to the larger-than-life, hand-holding feel of
the typical Hollywood film.  And even though Griffith and Johnson are
considerably more glamorous than their French counterparts (Richard
Bohringer and Anemone), they are instantly believable as partners in a
troubled marriage, people living too long with loss and guilt, people
who cut themselves off from contact with the very people who could heal
their pain.
     Honestly, I had no idea either Griffith or Johnson was such a good
actor.  Griffith captures the lost, hiding character of her part in
gestures of meekness and a whispery voice of a woman on the verge of a
nervous and marital breakdown.  Johnson turns what must be his best
performance as the man who must climb out of self-loathing and
bitterness.  These were performances I could believe in.
     Probably, the only member of the cast member whom I found to be
problematic was Elijah Wood, who played the boy in AVALON and who here
plays the insecure, loner city boy, the scholarship boy at the private
school who no more fits in with the sons of wealth than he does with the
street toughs who chase him in his own neighborhood.  Wood is supposed
to be the catalyst who saves the married couple he's sent to live with
as well as the tomboy who befriends him and, of course, himself.  I
found his part too pat, his character too passive, to be really
believable or understandable.
     Sheila McCarthy as the boy's mother, Thora Birch as the tomboy, and
Louise Latham as her unwed, unweddable mother turn in fine acting jobs.
Birch's role was conceived by Donoghue more seriously than I would have
preferred; she is after all a pretty funny little girl.  Her mother's
comic potential becomes in the hands of Donoghue more irritating than
funny and I was left wondering why anyone would put with such a person,
at least until the climactic scene.  Donoghue in general was so intent
on making a serious relationship film, so intent on eschewing Hollywood
fantasies, that she over-corrected into the realm of good intentions and
some dry stretches.
     Overall, I enjoyed PARADISE very much and can recommend it.  Try to
catch a bargain matinee to maximize your enjoyment.
     (NOTE: this film is rated PG-13 for language and some nudity.)

Title
Review for Prospero's Books (1991)
     PROSPERO'S BOOKS is a film by Peter Greenaway.  The film stars John
Gielgud.  The music is by Michael Nyman.
     I have been postponing writing about PROSPERO'S BOOKS because,
beyond shouting I loved it and admitting that I nearly dozed off in one
place, I am somewhat at loss to know what I can say.  It is a complex
film that certainly pushes the limits the definition of what a motion
picture is.  It also pushes the limits of what the viewer can take in.
I refer to the complex imagery, the multi-voiced dialogue, the
play-within-a-play structure, and the ambiguity of purpose and message.
In the meantime, allow me to present a few tentative, first impressions.
     I doubt that many of you reading this do not know that PROSPERO'S
BOOKS is a version, a vision, of Shakespeare's final play, "The
Tempest."  You probably also have read a synopsis of the story or are
already familiar with it, so I won't rework those tailings.  "The
Tempest" is easy to read as Shakespeare's farewell to the stage and as
such it may well represent a coherent commentary on play-making and the
play-maker.  The playwright is the magician who creates and destroys
entire worlds, who has the power to name and marshal characters and
forces not accessible to you and me, mere mortals, the audience.
     Although I don't imagine that Greenaway is bidding farewell to
movie-making, his way of presenting "The Tempest" is a commentary on his
own art, a visual essay on film-making, perhaps.  Certainly, it would
not be too startling to find a correlation between the magician and the
director.  One of my favorite moments in PROSPERO'S BOOKS comes when
Prospero leads his trains of spirits past a tableau of Prospero himself
writing the dialogue the ambulatory Prospero is speaking.  In the movie,
it is the act of writing the play "The Tempest" that is the magic that
moves the action (as, indeed, it is in our quotidian life)--not a
startlingly original idea on Greenaway's part, but a masterly, succinct
image of the idea.  It is an image that is suggestive, too, of the
question of how much the creator exists outside his (or her) creation,
how much the creator is self-creating.  Of course, the maddening thing
about what one might think of as visual criticism or visual philosophy
is that the image seldoms poses more than the question.  Imagery is
inherently ambiguous.  For many viewers, the ambiguities of PROSPERO'S
BOOKS will be a barrier to the film's accessibility.
     This film is first and foremost a visual art form.  There is some
irony, perhaps, in the way Greenaway subordinates the famous dialogue to
its visual equivalents; it is almost as if a contemporary director
proposed returning to the silent film.  Of course, films are primarily
visual experiences (whereas drama, and especially poetical drama such as
Shakespeare's, are essentially verbal experiences), particularly as
films are usually made these days; great dialogue is rare and such films
are subject to criticism of being "talky."
     It occurs to me that the most useful comparisons amongst recent
films are to be made with contemporary Shakespearean films, HENRY V by
Kenneth Branagh and HAMLET by Zeffirelli.  Such films typically struggle
to find ways not to be merely filmed plays.  The directors use realistic
or even historic sets, move scenes to outdoors locations, extend action
sequences, make use of appropriate special effects, and so forth.  But
woe betide the incautious director who dares rearrange scenes, edit
speeches, or take other liberties with the "Master's received text."
     Compared with Greenaway, Branagh and Zeffirelli produced utterly
conventional film versions of the plays.  It is, it seems to me, wholly
unfair to say that Greenaway has produced not so much as a film version
of "The Tempest," but a visualization of the play's major theme.  And
that has got some people upset.
     I confessed in the beginning to an attack of the drowsies while
watching PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  This came during the wedding sequence which
more like watching "The Tempest" as one would expect to see, and had
little to do with the playfulness, the richly detailed, painterly
surfaces, cinematic fantasies that I associate with Greenaway.  Of
course, I had put in a hard day's work at work, but the fact is that
during the parts of the film that were more challenging, more daring, I
stayed right in there, alert and happy.
     And speaking of staying right in there, the man who performed that
amazing version of Caliban never failed to delight and surprise me with
his ceaseless movements -- stretching, pointing, forever straining
against the invisible chains with which Prospero enslaved him.  The
three actors who played Ariel presented a charming concept of that airy
spirit.
     Watching the calligraphy in action was beautiful and fascinating,
more choreography than calligraphy at moments.  The costumes of the
courtiers, those amazing hats, collars, and shoes, were whimsical,
hilarious, and satirical, existing in ludicrous contrast to the wisps
and scraps that clothed the spirits, speaking volumes about
artificiality and civilization.  (These clothes put me in mind of BARON
MUNCHAUSEN, for what that's worth; exaggerated styles for exaggerated
imaginations, styles that say more than the wearer knows.)
     I loved the nudity, the lack both of coyness and titillation, the
variety of bodies, the way before the movie was over I had stopped
seeing them as naked and started them merely as nude.
     I wasn't too thrilled by the silly queen act of the two servants
who team up with Caliban to take over the island, but I can live with
it, I think.
     I was pleased and impressed by the interludes in which we were told
about Prospero's 24 books, the animation, the use of HDTV in the
inserts, and especially by the identity of the 24th book.  I was also
shocked by the fate of those books, as any literate person has to be;
our reactions, as much as the movie's (and the play's) actions vis-a-vis
the books speaks volumes about the power of books over us.  The power,
rarity, and beauty of the written word is one of the essential ideas in
"The Tempest"--an idea also acted by the close-ups of the calligraphy.
Greenaway's version of the books is remarkably like the television
version of another famous fictive book, THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE
GALAXY, books that can't stay still, that squirm and babble with powers
all their own.
     I haven't any idea whether to recommend PROSPERO'S BOOKS to you;
some of you will share my love of this movie, others will be subject to
various negative reactions, including irritation and frustration.  I
intend to see it again and I won't be particularly concerned about
whether I have to pay full price or not.

Title
Review for Goda viljan, Den (1992)
     THE BEST INTENTIONS is a Swedish film directed by Bille August,
from a screenplay by Ingmar Bergman.  It stars Pernilla August, Samuel
Froler, Max Von Sydow, Ghita Norby.  Unrated.  Swedish with English
subtitles.
     THE BEST INTENTIONS examines the subject of love.  It is Ingmar
Bergman's story about the courting and mating of his parents, Henrik and
Anna Bergman.  It is also about the love of the son for his parents.
And as it turned out, the love between Bille August and Pernilla
Ostergren August, who married and had a child during the filming of THE
BEST INTENTIONS.  (At one point in the story, Henrik lifts up Anna's
shift to reveal her swollen abdomen--a beautiful and shocking moment
because it is so clearly not a prosthetic.  It is also shocking that the
story says so clearly that love is a matter of forgiveness.  Throughout
the film, one character after another says, "Forgive me" or "I can never
forgive you" or finally "How can we ever forgive each other?"  I freely
admit I don't spend a lot of time thinking about love in the abstract so
maybe I am the last person on the planet to whom this is going to be an
amazing insight, but it comes close to being an epiphany for me, one for
which I am greatful in the extreme to Messrs August and Bergman.
     Their collaboration has produced a beautiful, thoughtful film,
intense, involving, complex in its characterizations.  They actually
produced two products, a six-hour version for Swedish television and the
three-hour theatrical release.  The theatrical version has already
earned two Palmes d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival (Best Picture and
Best Actress), and if it doesn't get the Best Foreign Film at the Oscars
I'll be mightily surprised.  Certainly, they've managed to make the
three hours move along briskly without producing a brisk movie.  It is
only at the very end, when perhaps I was just plain exhausted by the
emotional intensities of Henrik, Anna, and all their kin, that I became
aware of the length of the film.  The pacing is certainly slow and
deliberate, with painterly shots of the changing Swedish landscapes and
long, long moments of merely looking at one or two characters, of
looking into their eyes, of seeing their pain, their conflicts, their
love.  The cinematographer was Jorgen Persson, who has captured the
thin, soft light of the North that so perfectly reflects the
clouded-over emotions of these restrained and passionate Swedes.
     I read that Bergman, always the brilliant casting director,
insisted on Pernilla August for the part of Anna, the bourgeois princess
who defies her own, rock-solid mother to marry Henrik.  As Pernilla
Allwin, the actor had appeared as the maid in Bergman's final
directorial effort, FANNY AND ALEXANDER, which dramatized his parents'
later years.  Bergman said, "Films begin with the human face" -- an
insight lost on most Hollywood filmmakers, who appear to begin with a
marketing concept.  Bergman has filled his films with the likes of Bibi
and Harriet Andersson, Liv Ullman, and Lena Olin.  Pernilla August
continues that tradition.  Hers is not exactly a pretty face, but it is
appealing and it is strong; in the beginning of the movie, the actress
is visibly too old for her role -- this is going to be my only, and
distinctly minor, cavil.  She has something more important, and
certainly more lasting, than the prettiness of youth; she has radiance,
authority, energy, and great conviction.  One reviewer quotes her as
saying that August's slow pace let the actors achieve "the natural way
of acting.  .  .  .  When a movie goes so fast, and you want to tell so
much, then you take away the feelings from the audience.  If you go
slow, then the audience gets a chance to feel, to react."
     Much less is written about Samuel Froler in the role of Henrik
Bergman, the desperately poor, psychologically scarred divinity student
who stubbornly crosses class lines to woo and wed Anna, even as he
castigates himself for being a fool, for knowing that it will end in
failure.  During one of their marital crises, he cries out "I knew it
all along that you'd leave me."  It's a shame that the critics are
tending to overlook Froler's performance because it is every bit as
strong as Pernilla August's and he is an equally attractive screen
presence.  (Of course, Froler did not win a prize at Cannes as his
co-star Pernilla August, and therefore doesn't attract the publicity;
neither did he marry the director.)  The mysticism, the unhealing hurts,
the doubts, the love, the complexities of an extremely difficult but
worthy human being, all these qualities come out in the wonderful job
Froler turns in.
     I cannot recommend THE BEST INTENTIONS too highly to you.  You
simply must see it and you must see it on the big screen.

Title
Review for Pinocchio (1940)
     PINOCCHIO is a film from the Walt Disney Company.  It was first
released in 1940 and has been restored and rereleased this summer.
Directed by Ben Sharpsteen.  Voices by Dick Jones, Cliff Edwards, and
Evelyn Venable.  The story is loosely based on the AVVENTURE DI
PINOCCHIO by Collodi.
     PINOCCHIO has a reputation as the most technically brilliant,
emotionally charged, and the most disturbing of any of Disney's
full-length animated films.  The current reissue allows us to see this
paragon in colors that are lusher, sounds that are sharper, in the
correct dimensions, and my judgment is that the film fully lives up to
the legend.  It is every bit as fresh and accessible (and visible,
thanks to the technique of printing the original aspect ratio on modern
film stock so that the top and bottom of the image area are not cut
off), every bit as fresh, I say, as it must have been 52 years ago.
     Disney was under pressure in 1940 to repeat the commercial success
of SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS.  Disney indeed pull out the stops to
create a cast of memorable characters, including narrator Jiminy Cricket
as Pinocchio's conscience.  He commissioned an Oscar-winning score,
including the the Best Song "When You Wish Upon a Star" and my personal
favorite "I Got No Strings."  The animation and the backgrounds are
lavish to the point of amazing.  My favorite sequence, the Monstro
sequence, which begins with Pinocchio's and Jiminy's walk on the floor
of the ocean is, I think, especially beautiful as well as impressive,
charming, mysterious, amusing, emotional, and frightening.  The level of
art makes one want to yell "Stop, wait a moment, I want to study this
frame" over and over again.  Unfortunately for Disney, the film was not
a commercial success at first, the reviews were mixed, and audiences
were put off by its episodic structure, its general lack of comedy (most
of the comedy is decidedly black), and a tonal darkness that frightened
adults as well as children.  The Paradise Island sequence is often cited
as one of the great moments of screen horror.  William Everson, as
quoted in William Arnold's review in the Seattle P-I, wrote an essay in
the 60s in which he called the transformation of Lampwick "surely one of
the screen's supreme moments of horror."
     The characterizations are detailed and naturalistic.  For example,
the kitten Figaro, while possessing its cartoon-share of human
characteristics, nevertheless is one of the most cat-like cartoon cats I
have ever encountered: spunky, sweet, bouncy, tough, playful, curious,
cautious.  When Figaro walks across Gepetto's comforter, you know that
the animators studied living kittens in the perfect way they captured
that sure-unsure, fluffy-bottomed walk.  I also especially admired the
way the characters appear to have mass and weight, to actually be
walking on a surface, instead of floating over it as in most animations.
This was especially admirable in the ocean-walk, where one could see
Pinocchio working against the viscosity and current of the ocean water
as well as his buoyancy whenever he stopped moving.  These are details
that we have pretty much learned to live without even in the best modern
animations, such as THE LITTLE MERMAID, where the animators treat the
water exactly as they do the air.
     The film, for its short 90-minute running time, is packed with more
excellences than most films you or I will have occasion to see this
year.  When you go, there will be many children in the audience.  It
will be more or less noisy, with TV-bred moppets asking what this or
that is, but unless you are terminally hostile to children, you will
almost surely find yourself so drawn into the magic of PINOCCHIO that
you will become oblivious to the background noise.  You will have your
favorite character and sequence, but you will so charmed overall that
choosing a favorite will become a work of pleasure, of choosing among
excellences.
     I strongly encourage you to see this release of PINOCCHIO on the
big screen, even if you own a video copy or intend to get one.

Title
Review for Sleeping with the Enemy (1991)
     SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY stars Julia Roberts as an abused wife who
runs away to start a new life.  Although I always enjoy Roberts'
presence on the screen, I have to say that this is far from being her
best film.  Roberts, herself, turns in an energetic performance, but I
failed to detect any depth in her characterization of a potentially
interesting and complex woman.  Neither did I detect anything in the
story that added anything to my understanding of, or gave me an insight
into, spousal abuse.
     (Roberts' best film, IMHO, if you want to know, was MYSTIC PIZZA; 
everything that I can recall at this moment since then, including STEEL
MAGNOLIAS, has been tainted with melodrama.  FLATLINERS is probably a
reasonable contender for her second most interesting role.)
     Melodrama and a lack of originality are the problems with SLEEPING
WITH THE ENEMY.  Certainly the actors are attractive and competent.
Patrick Bergin, who plays the husband, gives the most interesting
performance of the three principals, but then the devil does always get
the best lines.  The actor who plays the new boyfriend suffers, perhaps,
from being too much a cute teddy bear and a too perfect would-be lover;
a trifle less understanding, forbearance, and patience might have added
some depth to his character.  Perfection is not good drama, how ever
much we might desire it in real life.
     In other words, once again the writer falls back on symmetry: the
bad husband, the good boyfriend, the hapless but not helpless woman in
between.  Symmetry gives control and predictability to a design, a
certain formal elegance.  But some little touch of asymmetry adds
interest and texture.
     The story is only slightly interesting in places and too
predictable throughout.  And the ending, which recapitulates one of the
movies' weakest and cheapest "surprise" endings, is a major let-down.
It was a pretty good schtick thirty years ago for Simone Signoret in
DIABOLIQUE; it was campy fun in CARRIE; it was the crowning touch of
sleaziness in the very sleazy FATAL ATTRACTION.  And here it is
inevitable.
     I can recommend SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY to two groups only: devoted
fans of Julia Roberts and people who have to see everything, despite
their own instincts and others' warnings.

Title
Review for Strangers in Good Company (1991)
     STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is a film directed by Cynthia Scott and
produced by the National Film Board of Canada.  It stars seven
non-professional actors, Alice Diabo, Mary Meigs, Constance Garneau,
Michelle Sweeney, Beth Webber, and two others whose names have gotten
away from me.  The screenplay was written by Gloria Demers with Cynthia
Scott, David Wilson, and Sally Bochner.
     In some ways, this yank thinks STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is the
perfect Canadian film.  It is quiet, sensitive, non-violent,
non-spectacular, the very opposite of the Hollywood flick; it is
informed by a love of its characters and the scenery (Mont Tremblant),
by intelligence, by the idea spoken by one the characters that everyone
has an interesting story.
     This story concerns six older women whose tour bus breaks down 20
miles from help.  They and their driver (Sweeney), a young, black woman
who has twisted her ankle, painfully make their way to a deserted
farmhouse above an idyllic lake.  They need shelter, beds, food, and
hope of rescue.  They set about surviving with an unhurried practicality
and openness.  Some of their efforts are silly, some crafty.  They do
what they can and they complain or blame hardly at all.  They spend a
lot of their time talking and revealing their interesting stories.  No
potboilers, no confrontations, no great break throughs, just people
depending on one another.
     The dramatis personae include a nun with an interest in
automechanics, an elegant lesbian who paints watercolors and who has a
fund of facts about nature (Meigs), an ex-Liverpudlian with a face like
an owl and a unique approach to aerobics, a woman with a high-pitched
voice and the cheeriness of an idiot or a saint, a Mohawk matriarch
(Diabo) who knows some tricks about wild food and survival, a beautiful
and young looking 80-year-old (Webber) with a fear of wattles, the
driver with a talent for making music and friends, and a 92-year-old
(Garneau) who thinks she may have found a good place to die.
     These women largely play themselves, it is their stories that they
tell so effectively.  The director from time to time shows old snapshots
from life of character or another; you see the story in their changing
faces.
     My audience had a preponderance of older people in it, exactly the
opposite of most movie audiences.  This may have been a reflection of
the matinee ticket prices (which are lower than seniors prices).
Certainly the mob waiting for the next show were more demographically
normal.  The younger couple behind me thought that every action and
utterance on the screen was so cute as to require a laugh.  It's true,
sometimes the women were unspeakably cute, but at other times they broke
our hearts, they moved us to tears, they filled us with awe at their
bravery, their grace, their acceptance of life.  They had their fears
(death, not seeing a great-grandchild grow up, being ugly, not dying
even); after all, they were human beings--and we are all afraid, but are
we all as wise about our fears and foolishness?
     If I have any complaints about STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY, it is
that the cast is too perfectly balanced.  Could such a group really find
themselves on one small tour bus--the nun, the dyke, the Indian, the
Afro-Canadian, the English immigrant, et aliae?  This is the only
artifice in a movie that emphasizes naturalness, the only fiction in a
movie that is really about real people.
     Please see this movie.  It will change you.  Pay whatever they ask
to get in.  If it doesn't play where you see import movies, as the
manager to schedule it.  And then send a letter of thanks to the
National Film Board of Canada.

Title
Review for League of Their Own, A (1992)
     A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN is a film directed by Penny Marshall, from a
screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel.  It stars Geena Davis,
Lori Petty, Tom Hanks, Madonna, Rosie O'Donnell, and Megan Cavanaugh.
Rated PG for mature humor.
     A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN is a funny, warm movie about a nearly
forgotten moment in U.S.  professional sports.  It is also less than it
could have been and backs off from having the kind of impact that Geena
Davis' last movie, THELMA AND LOUISE, had.  What's here is fine, but it
is only the surface of what should be a great story, rich and
reverberant beyond the limited significance of the story per se.
     Penny Marshall, the director of BIG and AWAKENINGS (as well as
JUMPIN' JACK FLASH, but that's a different story), backed off the larger
meaning of the story in its latter part, when the story focuses on the
relationship of the two sister-players, played by Davis and Lori Petty.
The predictable story plays itself out with lots of emotion and
schmaltz, like any self-respecting baseball picture, in the Big Game at
the end.  But up until the story shifted into this phase, Marshall had
done a pretty good job of expanding the story to make some telling
points about the sexism of the times, about racism (in a brief and
memorable scene involving a black woman with a fierce pitching arm and a
fiercer face, knowing that two barriers were keeping her out of pro
ball), the personal price war exacts, and the bravery and strength of
individuals in the face of oppressions of all kinds.
     It is, however, the actors that really make LEAGUE the success that
is.  The secondary parts are filled by some primary talent.  Jon Lovitz
as the baseball scout steals every one of the few scenes he's in with
his dry, tough wit.  Megan Cavanaugh as the homely, downtrodden slugger
is hilarious and not a little heartbreaking; this is the what the world
does to such people, and you have to cheer them when they learn to fight
back.
     Madonna as "All-the-way" Mae Mordabito is completely charming; it's
a made-to-order part, but what makes it and her good is not her "bosoms"
(as in "What if my bosoms, you know, fall out?"  To which Rosie
O'Donnell replies "You think there ain't no man in America what ain't
seen your bosoms?")  is Mae's friendships first with Doris Murphy
(O'Donnell), then with the player she teaches to read with the help of a
dirty paperback; it's these friendships that make us take a interest in
this ex-taxi dancer.
     O'Donnell herself walks away with her scenes, leaving Madonna in
the dust.  O'Donnell is feisty, fierce, loyal, and full of energy as the
third base player.
     But, of course, the greatest scene stealer is Geena Davis who
towers over the rest of the cast figuratively and literally.  The woman
who plays the older Dottie, by the way, looks like a very tall version
of the Beav's mom, Barbara Billingsley, which is a little unnerving.
Davis plays Dottie Hinson, the best player in the All-American Girls
Baseball League, the only one who says she does not love baseball.  But
she's competitive and while she's a player she plays as the game is
meant to be played.  Davis is strong and straight; she looks right with
dirt on her face, she looks right spitting tobacco.  She's a believable
leader, and her role in redeeming Jimmy Dugan, played by Tom Hanks, is
entirely credible.  And the scene with her husband (Bill Pullman) is
nicely underplayed and breathlessly exciting.  It is pleasurable to
watch her every scene in this movie.
     Lori Petty plays her sister Kit.  Kit's the interesting one in
terms of having problems to work through.  Kit is jealous and feeling
under the shadow of her big sister.  She may come off as a little
petulant, perhaps not entirely sympathetic.  And whether she honestly
earns her place in the sun at the end in an open question that movie
posits without following up on.
     Tom Hanks plays a washed up, self-pitying, alcoholic ex-great who
is reduced to "managing" the Rockford Peaches.  He's a mess and it's
great fun to see Tom who has gotten entirely too much mileage out of
being cute being very uncute here and still be engaging and very funny.
He has a couple of scenes, including one consisting of him holding in
his anger, which are well worth the price of your ticket.  Hanks as
Dugan is a charmer, but it is also a character that is built up and then
dropped, much as Cavanaugh and Petty are, all in the interest of going
for the laughs and the tears.
     There is some sentiment in LEAGUE, scenes that made the tears
stream down my face.  The ending recreates the inauguration of the
Women's Baseball exhibit at Cooperstown, an event that saw the
beginnings of the film itself -- Marshall attended the ceremony and
interviewed some of the living veterans of the AAGPGL before she decided
to go with LEAGUE -- an event, I say, that may charm and move you or
make you squirm depending on your tolerance for sentiment.  But the
older versions of the players are a fine and interesting group of women,
and I found their presence refreshing and uplifting.
     I recommend A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN to you, recommend it
enthusiastically and wholeheartedly.  You can even play full price and
get your money's worth.  It is, I think, the best general-release,
Hollywood movie I've seen this summer.

Title
Review for Mari de la coiffeuse, Le (1990)
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND (LE MARI DE LA COIFFEUSE) is a French
film directed by Patrice Leconte, from a screenplay by Leconte and
Claude Kotz.  It stars Jean Rochefort and Anna Galiena.  Not rated;
contains adult subject matter.  English subtitles.
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND is a very personal follow-up to Patrice
Leconte's MONSIEUR HIRE (1990).  This new film tells the story of a man
who is obsessed from childhood with the idea of marrying a hairdresser
like the voluptuous Alsatian coiffeuse who barbered and aroused him
during his boyhood vacation to the seaside.  Both films are about
obsession, about erotic fantasy.  Both films are short (89 minutes for
HIRE, 84 for HUSBAND); both are economical, spare, pure, and precise in
their narratives.  However, whereas HIRE was cold, monochromatic,
HUSBAND is warm, romantic, idyllic, intensely restrained, and full of
humor and sensuality.  HIRE is the dark and HUSBAND is the light; this
is not to say that HUSBAND is not ultimately sad, however.
     The two principals are well cast.  The familiar face of Jean
Rochefort (MY WONDERFUL LIFE, PARDON MON AFFAIRE, THE TALL BLONDE MAN
WITH ONE DARK SHOE, and many others) is remarkable in the way it
combines a merry twinkle behind its melancholy, droopy wrinkles.  He is
absolutely charming, utterly convincing, as the man whose happiness to
completely given over to his obsession.  To see him slide and windmill
through the Algerian pop songs he loves to dance to is to see a man who
cares only for the opinions of one other person in the whole world, a
person utterly convinced of his rightness, and doomed to a great love
and a terrible fate for his singlemindedness.
     Anna Galiena is not only a vision of healthy young beauty, she is
self-contained, mysterious, brave enough to marry and love a stranger,
but not ready to be a companion to a mere friend, not quite brave enough
for change.
     The story line is thin, but the emotional content of HUSBAND is
rich in its sensitivities and telling observations.  The use of
character study more than makes up for the lack of story.  We really
don't have to know how Antoine can live without working; he lives on
love obviously.  It is his love for Mathilde that is the point, not some
mundane side issue of mere money.  Mathilde wants to live in an
unchanging world, where love is always the first rush of infatuation,
where people never age, where every day is cutting hair and every night
is making love in the shop.  It is Mathilde's obsession, not Antoine's
-- all he wants to do is live with and love his hairdresser forever --
that leads to the tragedy.  The final scene is the funny-sad result --
the patient waiting for something that will never happen again.
     THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND is a strange movie, a whimsical fantasy,
almost a fairy tale, deeply personal, but quite approachable.  It is
elegantly told.  It is not quite moving in the lachrymose sense, but I
think it will be a movie that will stay with me for some time.
     I recommend THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND.  It is worth even full
ticket prices.

Title
Review for Sur la terre comme au ciel (1992)
     Here are some films I've seen so far at the Seattle International
Film Festival (SIFF).  These are not reviews, merely mentions to alert
one or two of you in case they show up at a film festival or art house
near you.
BROTHER'S KEEPER is a documentary by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky.
Four bachelor brothers have lived all their lives on a dairy farm in New
York state.  One of the brothers is accused of the mercy killing of
another -- or is it a sex crime?  -- the prosecution doesn't much care
as long it gets a conviction.  The local community that for decades
ignored the "boys" as smelly and unsightly messes rally round them now
to protect them from the outsiders.  This is a brilliant piece of film
making, initially repugnant (the brothers really are hard to take), the
story quickly becoming fascinating and moving and mysterious with drama
and comedy and wonderfully revealing interviews with the brothers, the
neighbors, the prosecution, the defense.  Highly recommended.  In fact,
this should be next year's Oscar winner, if there were any justice
(which there never is, in this category, at least).
HAPPY BIRTHDAY!  is a German film directed by Doris Dorrie and starring
Hansa Czypionka, Ozay, Doris Kunstmann, Lambert Hamel, Omer Simsek.
This is an interesting, funny, fascinating, entertaining, and original
contribution to the hard-boiled detective genre.  In this case, the
private eye is a German-speaking Turk Kemal Kayankaya, who is scorned by
the Turks in Germany because he's not a "real" Turk (he speaks no
Turkish, was raised by German foster parents) and constantly subjected
to the anti-Turkish racism of the Germans.  He's hired by a Turkish
woman to find her missing husband and gets involved in an ever deepening
morass of greed, corruption, and violence.  Highly recommended.
LOVERS (AMANTES) is a Spanish film directed by Vincente Aranda and
starring Jorge Sanz and Victoria Abril.  Based on a true story, set in
1954-55 in Franco Spain, it is the story of a weak but very sexy young
man who is caught in a struggle between two women.  Victoria Abril, who
was an Almodovar regular and whom I last saw in HIGH HEELS, won a Silver
Bear at the Berlin Film Festival for this performance.  The film was
Spain's highest grossing film last year and swept the major awards at
the Spanish equivalent of the Oscars, according to the producer who
spoke with the audience after the film.  This film begins as a comedy
and spins down into a very dark and disturbing drama.  It is admirably
paced and acted.  Highly recommended.
ON EARTH AS IN HEAVEN is a Belgian, French-language film directed by
Marion Hansel and starring Carmen Maura.  Maura, of course, is the first
Spanish actor to achieve real international popularity, mostly because
of her performance in Almodovar's WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS
BREAKDOWN.  This film, in which she speaks French, is about a single
female journalist who decides to have a baby by herself, but the unborn
child has other ideas.  I had a lot of problems with the central conceit
of this film, viz., the mother communicating with her unborn baby in
words.  The movie is heavily message-laden, and while it is a worthy
message the power of the message is diluted by the unbelievable premise.
Probably, the movie is of interest only to real fans of Carmen Maura,
such as myself.
GOODBYE, BOYS (DO SVIDANIYA, MALCHIKI) is a Russian 1966 film directed
by Mikhail Kalik.  This film was suppressed by Soviet censors for
decades, but has finally emerged.  It is the coming-of-age story of
three boys, life-long friends, in a Yalta-like resort city on the
(Black?)  Sea.  This is the last summer of their childhood.  In the fall
they will be going to officer school in Leningrad.  It was shot in black
and white with minimal dialog and lots of lingering mood shots of
sunlight on the waves and footprints on the sand being washed away.  It
is a charmer, even though it seems dated and something of a period
piece, and technically somewhat crude or amateurish.  I was confused
through most of the film by the time frame.  It appears, when all is
said and done to be set in the late Thirties just before Hitler attacked
the Soviet Union.  Some German and Soviet newsreel clips are spliced in,
but I misunderstood them to be flashbacks, rather than contemporary
events or forecasts of the war to come.  Still, I think this film would
be of interest to many of us.  The three boys and the other actors are
all interesting and lively performers, and the film provides a glimpse
at a now vanished culture, too.  What I'm not sure about is why the
censors objected; perhaps the film failed to show proper enthusiasm for
war or they suspected it was making fun of communism, which are probably
both true.  Recommended with reservations.

Title
Review for Shadows and Fog (1992)
     SHADOWS AND FOG is a film written and directed by Woody Allen.  It
stars Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, John Malkovich, and John Cusak, with Lily
Tomlin, Jodie Foster, Madonna, Julie Kavner, Wallace Shawn, Kathy Bates,
Kate Nelligan, Donald Pleasance, Fred Gwynne, and Kenneth Mars.
Production design is by Santo Loquasto and cinematography by Carlo
DiPalma.  Rated PG-13 for sexual situations.
     SHADOWS AND FOG is minor Woody Allen, but for the true believer
(such as your humble correspondent) second-rate Woody Allen is better
than just about anything else that is likely to be booked into town on a
given weekend.  I have to admit that the chameleonic nature of Allen's
films can be a little frustrating at times.  He's done his hommages (and
I'm sure he'd use the French word) to almost every important school of
film making and the greatest film makers.  SHADOWS AND FOG is an homage
to Kafka and to the German expressionist film school.  It has its
charms, but they will be most obvious to those of us who are predisposed
to find them.
     The film is in black and white and fog.  The action is limited to
one endless night is a city that resembles the Prague we saw in Stephen
Soderburgh's KAFKA (a mostly black-and-white film) but more
claustrophobic, more artificial, more suggestive of a sound stage.  And
of course, it is a little strange that this does seem to be the Year of
the Kafkas with Soderburgh, the reissue of the Argentine movie THE LOVES
OF KAFKA, and now this.  Whereas Soderburgh studiously strove to avoid
the Kafkaesque (he fined crew and cast for using the word on the set),
Allen is a-wash in it.  Nothing makes sense, nor is it meant to.  A
strangler, a mob at war with itself, a doctor looking the physical
origin of evil, the hatemongers, the corrupt police and clergy, the
circus that no goes to, the student, the whores, the source of the
lights under wagons and behind fences, the magician, the ending.
     Of course, it's all a metaphor for the way Life is, and it's a
good, if not terribly original, way of talking about art, movie-making,
and all that esthetics stuff that we popcorn eaters usually try to
avoid.  We don't know why life or art starts, why it ends, what happens
during, before, or afterward.  We are all stumbling around in Shadows
and Fog.  It's all there, but it is a trifle obvious.  The best parts
are some of the cameos, especially Julie Kavner's ("Get out there,
Kleinman, and get killed."), Donald Pleasance as the ghoulish medico,
Madonna -- surprisingly -- ("I'm not fussy.  I'll eat whatever you put
in front of me."), Wally Shawn who is in contention for the cameo king
of American movies, and Lily Tomlin as a hard-bitten whore.  In a movie
that is studiously plotfree, the presence of so many guest stars is much
more tolerable than in many movies, where the cameos are often a form of
Hollywood cronyism (PETER PAN springs to mind here), gamesmanship, and
otherwise irrelevant to the movie.  The cameos in SHADOWS AND FOG may
possibly contribute to the meaning of the movie (you never show whom
you're going to run into in the fog, life is arbitrary and surprising)
and provide little islands of clarity in all the swirling murk.  For
example, the Kavner scene fills us in on a bit of Kleinman's past and
his personality.
     Four of the roles rise above guest shots: Allen, Mia Farrow as Irmy
the swordswallower, John Cusak as the student whose studies of the human
condition take him to brothels and bars, and John Malkovich as the clown
too caught in being an artist to be a Mensch.  Allen was Allen; we fans
would never permit him to be otherwise.  The harmless little man caught
up in things beyond his powers to understand or to articulate, he can
only stutter and rub his hands endlessly.  The everyman who survives
with oneliners and sidesteps and who finds his redemption is the world
of illusion (beginning to sound a little autobiographical, ain't it?).
     Mia Farrow as Irmy continues to be Woody's understudy, and maybe
heir apparent.  As I remarked when I reviewed ALICE, she's taken on his
mannerisms, if not quite his persona, to an almost disturbing degree.
Is she the new Zelig?  Her performance is probably the most interesting,
certainly her character is, a circus swordswallower with biological
clock and a price.  Look out for her scene in the brothel; it is the
best this movie has to offer.
     John Malkovich is a very mannered actor, whose ability to
communicate intellectualized selfishness is nonpareil but does not quite
work as the clown.  Of course, it's amusing to all of us other clowns to
have him in full makeup going on about his life as an Artist, about how
his head is constantly full of wonderful new things, but I kept seeing
Valmont from DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  Malkovich, funny though he could be,
never seemed to fully connect with the essential absurdity of his
character and took his too earnestly.
     On the other hand, John Cusak was perfect as the student.  One
could believe that this was the stand-in for Kafka himself.  Trying hard
to keep his materialism and world-weariness intact, asking about God and
suicide, and yet with the underlying romanticism that kept nagging him
not to dismiss everything that every happened to him.
     Overall, I have to admit that is one of the master's least
successful efforts.  It is almost all style, little substances, surfaces
and no depths.  The existential questions are like the usual suspects;
Woody's rounded them up again, but it's not too any great purpose.  It
will be of interest only to the true believer.  The rest of you may
safely pass it by.  True believers are cautioned to pay matinee prices.
     There is a rather wonderful last line, maybe that is worth the
price of the matinee ticket.

Title
Review for Herman (1990)
     HERMAN is a Norwegian film directed by Erik Gustavson, written by
Lars Saabye Christensen from his own novel.  It stars Anders Danielson
Lie, Frank Robert, Elisabeth Sand.  Unrated.  In Norwegian, with English
subtitles.
     HERMAN is that unlikeliest of films, a fresh coming-of-age story.
It is about an 11-year-old Oslo schoolboy, Herman (Anders Danielson
Lie), who is a rather withdrawn, runty kid, bullied at school and
misunderstood at home.  He lives in a vivid fantasy world that includes
a Norwegian-speaking Zorro and walking into traffic whilst pretending to
be blind.  His only friends are his ailing grandfather and a beer-soaked
neighbor who was once a gardener to the king and who has pretty vivid
fantasy life himself until it turns into a first-class case of the DTs.
Herman's already fragile world really unravels when his barber discovers
a bald patch on the child's head, the first symptoms of alopecia areata,
an incurable cosmetic disorder that will cause him to lose all his hair
in time.
     It is Herman's progressive reactions to his malady and his growing
baldness that mark his growth and maturity.  His alopecia is, on one
level, merely a symbol of the agonies and changes that we all go through
moving from childhood to adulthood.  But like all good symbols, this one
is vividly specific, as Herman moves through anger (at his fate and at
his parents who are at something of a loss to know how to handle
things), onto various strategies, disguises, and other forms of denial
and withdrawal, and ultimately landing on his feet in a charming act of
acceptance.
     Herman as played by Lie believably, ingratiatingly, and often
comically.  His performance is likable, light-hearted, and completely
natural.  He manages to make the unusual point that even a child in a
stable, functional, loving family can still have a childhood marked by
pain and insecurity, that growing up is hellish for all of us.  Herman
performs the more accustomed role, too, of deflating adult pretenses and
evasions, of finding the truth amidst the lies.
     This is a totally charming film and I recommend it highly.  It's
current run in Seattle (Metro Cinemas) is its U.S. premiere.  It's
being distributed by RKO Pictures.  If it comes to your area, do
yourself the favor of going.

Title
Review for Fisher King, The (1991)
     THE FISHER KING is a film directed by Terry Gilliam, written by
Richard LaGravenese.  It stars Robin Williams, Jeff Bridges, Mercedes
Ruehl, and Amanda Plummer.
     THE FISHER KING is the first film by Terry Gilliam the script of
which he did not write.  His previous films (including THE TIME BANDITS,
BRAZIL, and THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN) are marked by
particularly compelling visual fantasies, rococco dreams, wounded
innocence, and whimsical anti-rationality.  THE FISHER KING is also a
recognizable Gilliam film.  Here we have the innocent locked in combat
with a cynical world.  We have spectacle and fantasy and whimsy.  But
unlike the curious emotional detachment that marks his earlier films,
there is here a commitment to emotion, to feeling, and the result is a
more humane film.
     It is also, no doubt to the regret of Gilliam's true believers,
more disciplined, more controlled, less beguiling, less amazing, and
less unconventional than his past auteuristic efforts.  Neither is THE
FISHER KING black in its humor or nihilistic in its conclusions.  The
film ends on one of the uppest notes you will ever see in a movie, but
one that is so fantastic as to be tinged possibly with some small
measure of irony.
     Certainly, the film concentrates on its characters more than that
has been previously the case.  This is, at least in part, one result of
using of using a star cast with recognizable names; and in part, the
result of using LaGravenese's original script that emphasizes
relationships and character development in a way that Gilliam's own
script, spinning out their entrancing webs of fantasy and spectacle,
never do.
     The principal actors are each excellent in his or her own way.
Robin Williams will naturally attract the lion's share of the attention
to his performance as Parry, the lost and wounded street person and
former mediaeval history prof.  It is a very showy, energetic
performance, indeed, and another high watermark in Williams' continuing
growth from extemporizing stand-up comic to an actor of depth and
control.  This is not to say that Williams is any less the uniquely
manic, pyrotechnical talent he's always been.  But he's learning how to
use it to create a character other than Robin Williams.
     Jeff Bridges will deserve more praise for his achievement in THE
FISHER KING than he is likely to get, the result of working with an
actor as scene-stealing as Williams.  However, Bridges turns in as fine
a performance as he ever has as another wounded, lost victim of the
psychosis we call the modern world.  He's a former talk radio star who
destroys his life and many others' with a mean-spirited, thoughtless,
on-the-air remark.  His character Jack reluctantly is drawn into the
role of Parry's knight errant.  Parry wants to recover the Holy Grail,
which takes two forms in this movie: a cup in a millionaire's library
and a mousy little klutz of an office drudge played by Amanda Plummer.
Jack's role is to heal himself by healing Parry and the other
characters.  In this movie everyone is Percival and the Fisher King.
     (Bridges is also the focus of an interesting subtext concerning 
homophobia.  Jack tells Parry early on, "Don't ever hug me in public
again."  During the now well-known nude romp in the Meadow of Central
Park, Jack says to himself that he expects "a homophobic jogger" to
happen by and decide to avenge himself on his father.  One of the
important supporting characters is a wonderfully off-the-wall drag queen
who sprawls across Jack's lap in one scene, a sprawl that turns into a
protective cuddle.  Jack becomes less and less worried about being
mistaken for a gay man as the movie progresses to its final scene back
in the Meadow.  BTW, I loved the performance of the dragster; I don't
have his name here, but he's become one of my current heroes.  His scene
delivering a singing message to Plummer is one of the great moments in
this movie.)
     The two women have featured roles, rather than roles that are
visible in virtually every scene.  Mercedes Ruehl plays Anne, Jack's
patrona and savior and girl friend and sometime employer.  Ruehl is best
remembered for her role in MARRIED TO THE MOB.  She brings to the role
of Anne the same toughness with an added tenderness and nurturing; she
suffers for love, but there are limits.  She's strong-willed and
supportive and enters into a unwilling friendship with Plummer than
parallels somewhat Jack's relationship to Parry.  Amanda Plummer is
equally admirable as the egoless wallflower who blooms and discovers
life.  She tells Anne she has no personality; Anne tells her that au
contraire she does have a personality -- sometimes she can be a real
bitch.  Plummer's character visibly opens up and flourishes like a
sunrise to this suggestion: yes, being a bitch is a very good thing to
be for her.
     THE FISHER KING has much more linear plot than "real" Gilliam
movies, but it has its moments of magic and wonder.  You've probably
heard about the waltzing scene by now; this scene is managed with such
smoothness and deftness to make you gasp with admiration of the
director's technical skill, as well as the auteur's vision.  There are
bits and pieces of paper and floss drifting unexplainedly and
inexplicably through scenes.  Do they have meaning?  Does meaning?
Gilliam uses New York as if it were a set built to his specs.  His
camera angles depict the rise and fall and rise of his characters.  It
is a complete film, using all a film's resources.
     Be warned that the movie depicts horrifying violence, uses obscene
language, nudity, sentiment (but not sentimentality), romance, and
tears.
     I highly recommend THE FISHER KING, even at full prices.

Title
Review for Far and Away (1992)
     FAR AND AWAY is a film direct by Ron Howard, from a script by Bob
Dolman.  It stars Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Thomas Gibson, and Robert
Prosky.  Rate PG-13, due to language, violence, subject matter.
     FAR AND AWAY has quite rightly been described, as it was in the
Seattle P-I, as an historic romance novel, of the Danielle Steele
variety, come to the screen.  Gothic romances have been with us for
decades, but this may be a new subgenre for the films.  It is far less
interested in history than it is in romance, and little things like
historical verity, reality, even probability and the normal passage of
time are likely to be swept aside by the rush of superhuman emotions,
mostly restrained until the last scene.
     This is not to say that FAR AND AWAY is not as enjoyable a piece of
cornball as you're likely to encounter for some time.  It has some of
that old epic sweep, it has pace and movement that only bogs down once
-- and that for a little romantic interlude -- and it has wonderful set
pieces.  And like all of Ron Howard's films it is safely sanitized and
irrepressibly wholesome.  Even the whores are as safe and clean and
friendly as the Ladies' Sewing Circle.
     I think it is profitable to see FAR AND AWAY as acts of contrition
on the parts of Howard (for BACKDRAFT) and Cruise and Kidman (for DAYS
OF THUNDER).  This film is vastly superior to either of those, although
the fire photography looks mighty familiar.
     Howard and writer Bob Dolman have given us an old-fashioned
narrative that is rousing, funny, and uplifting, and heartwarmingly
romantic.  Howard has used his 70-millimeter process (Super Panavision
70) to wonderful effect, especially in the really big, really sharp
territorial shots, and most especially in the Land Rush sequence, which
is rousing as all hell and full of details glimpsed for a second or five
in the pell-mell onslaught of people, animals and landscape.  I also
enjoyed the bare-knuckle fight sequences; one cannot help but cheer
Cruise on to victory each time he strips off his shirt.  Of course, it
is all shameless, predictable, and shallow.  But what the hell!  it's
also great fun.
     Cruise and his wife Nicole Kidman do creditable jobs with their
roles.  I am beginning to think, though, that Howard for all his
facility is not a woman's director.  It certainly seemed to me that a
great opportunity was passed up in the creation of Shannon's character.
She could have been a truly fascinating woman, instead she remains only,
half-understood, half-realized.  Cruise, on the other hand, appears to
have taken his character about as far as the script would allow.  Of
course, it is possible that he is a better actor than she, but it's not
a pretty thought and one which I am loathe to entertain.
     The supporting actors are a mixed bag, generally good, but uneven.
Robert Prosky who played Shannon's land-owner father was pretty close to
perfect, a man whose desire for freedom was every bit as strong as it
was submerged by his wife's powerful personality.  I don't have many of
the cast members' names in front of me.  The part of the wife was
excellent, however, and grew in an interesting way.  The main heavy, the
estate manager (was that Thomas Gibson?), is probably too dark, too
heavy, too one-sided to be interesting, but the actor gave it his all
and made us feel some serious animosity toward character.  I have more
of a problem with the Irish villagers in the first part of the movie,
viz., they are so darn cute.  This is Howard cleaning up history for us,
I fear, just as he managed to de-odorize the Irish slums of New York, as
well as pass up an opportunity or two to show how really rotten the
system was that used and owned the immigrants to the benefit of the
bosses.
     I was most distressed, however, to see the incredibly short shrift
Howard and Dolman gave to the Native Americans whose land was being
stolen from them to make the Land Rush possible in the first place.  We
have a -- what?  -- five second shot of three Indians, one wearing part
of a U.S. cavalry uniform, watching the white settlers line up for the
start of the Rush.  I think they might spared a line or two of dialog to
set the record straight.  That the Cimarron Strip was the last of Indian
Territory, that major treaties were being broken one more time, that the
land was already occupied.  And so forth, and so on.  Familiar you say?
Sure it is.  And worth repeating every once in a while.  Like the story
of the Holocaust, the World War II Holocaust, that is.
     But still, and despite the above, or maybe because of it, Ron
Howard has given us a rip-snorting, rootin'-tootin' epic of the Irish in
America, by extension of all immigrants, an epic that sweeps us along
and entertains us mightily.

Title
Review for Born Yesterday (1993)
     BORN YESTERDAY is a film directed by Luis Mandoki, from a
screenplay by Douglas McGrath and based on the play by Garson Kanin. It
stars Melanie Griffith, Don Johnson, and John Goodman. Rated PG for
sexual references.
     BORN YESTERDAY was first filmed by George Cukor in 1950 and is
based on a Broadway comedy by Garson Kanin. The 1950 version won Judy
Holliday an Oscar for best actress and established her as one of the
great stars of the 50s. This 1950 version is so great, so definitive,
and so identified with Holliday that any performer who dares to take is
either going to dazzle us with her chutzpah or confirm us in our
prejudice against remakes of great films.  After all, who would have
the presumption to recapitulate Rick in CASABLANCA or Scarlett in GONE
WITH THE WIND?  As a matter of fact, sequels have been attempted to both
these classics with the same effect as dropping a pebble in the ocean.
     So, ladies and gentlemen, hats off to Melanie Griffith. She pulled
it off. Her version of Billie evokes Holliday's without aping it and
allows Griffith to make this famous character her own. Griffith could
never deliver the amazing repertoire of shrill squeaks and noisy
whines, but she has the nerve and the skill to confront the legend of
Holliday directly in such recreated scenes as the gin-rummy game with
her brutally rich paramour, a role played by Broderick Crawford in 1950
(and Paul Douglas on Broadway) and by John Goodman in 1993.  One thing
that Griffith -- and director Luis Mandoki -- do is to play down the
dumb-blonde thang and quieting down some of the broader humor of the
1950 version. Griffith's Billie is uneducated but right from the
beginning we -- and Don Johnson's political-reporter character -- see a
hint of an insightful intelligence underneath those amazing earrings.
     John Goodman is quite an improvement in fact over Crawford just as
Johnson is better than William Holden. Goodman is vulgar, selfish, and
violent but still he manages at times to make his monster character
almost likable, or at least sympathetic (the gin-rummy game and the
dancing sequence, for example); he throws this away near the end, but
up until them we did a more complex, more dramatically interesting
character than Crawford's junk-dealer turned ogre.
     As for Don Johnson, let me say right here that he is a major
cutie, a man who keeps getting more and more attractive. He is also a
delightful actor, a fact I have been aware only since he and Griffith
made PARADISE a year or two ago.  Holden was never very credible as an
idealist, given his tough, cynical persona as developed throughout the
course of his career. Johnson convinces us more readily and brings a
certain less-than-perfect complexity to his part, just as Goodman is
for most of the movie less-than-monstrous.
     This is an uplifting movie in which something magical and heroic
happens, in which a lot of bubbles are exploded (National Public Radio
comes in for some delightful knocks, for example), stereotypes are
overcome, and people learn to do the right thing for themselves and for
their world.
     I recommend BORN YESTERDAY to you, even at full ticket price. And
if you can, take a look at Judy Holliday's version. It is one of the
great comedies of its era, just Melanie Griffith's version could very
well turn out to be one of the great comedies of the current era.

Title
Review for Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead (1990)
     ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD is a movie written and
directed by Tom Stoppard and adapted from his play of the same name.
The movie stars Gary Oldman (Rosencrantz), Tim Roth (Guildenstern), and
Richard Dreyfuss (the Player).
     Stoppard wrote R&G ARE DEAD in 1964 and instantly became a Major
Playwright.  This is the reward for chutzpah for it is certainly an act
of nervy pushiness to take two minor characters from HAMLET and turn
them loose in a world that mixes Shakespeare, Laurel and Hardy, Abbot
and Costello, Samuel Beckett, and the Marx Brothers in a vast, lapping
sea of words.  One of the boys (and even they are forever getting
confused about who's on first) says: "Words!  All we have are words."
As sure as there are 101 keys on my keyboard, this is the *texte* of the
play and of the movie.  The word play is profound and silly, a literal
game (played on a tennis court in one scene), as it were.  It is a world
designed by Escher, a world of convoluted circles, a world where R&G are
the audience and the players, and a world which may or may not be
enclosed or even exist in the collapsible walls of the portable theater
of a troupe of itinerant players.
     The players, BTW, are a delight, apparently Yugoslavian mimes (the
location work was shot in Yugoslavia); one is tempted by the possibility
that in this world of words gone amok it is the mimes who are in
control.  They are led by Richard Dreyfuss as a cross between Prospero
and W. C. Fields and not a little resembling God.  Dreyfuss's natural
tendency to smarminess, smugness, and insufferability are handsomely and
profitably showcased in this role, which reminds us once again that,
Holly Hunter movies notwithstanding, Richard Dreyfuss is an actor yet.
     The boys, R&G, Oldman and Roth, are show-stoppers, nonpareils,
virtuosi.  They are British actors, Oldman having been in STATE OF GRACE
and Roth in VINCENT & THEO.  Their tongues and wits are as mobile as
their faces.  We're never quite sure, any more than they, who is who,
but still they create individuals out of two funny names.  Large bits of
HAMLET are mixed into R&G ARE DEAD and Oldman and Roth demonstrate the
alarming ability to speak their speeches in the received Shakespearean
mode even while telling each other and us that they haven't the faintest
notion what any of this is about; it's as if they knew how to say two
words at once.  They are gifted physical comedians as well, for theirs
are strenuous roles that require enormous physical efforts and not a few
pratfalls.
     Roth's Guildenstern fancies himself the intellectual of the pair,
but in fact his intellectualism is an endless maze of Schoolman
Platonisms and hair-splittings.  Whereas Oldman's Rosencrantz is the one
who is aware of the world, who is on the perpetual edge of one great
scientific discovery or another, only to have each snatched from him at
the moment of discovery.  He is also the one who asks the questions that
go beyond Roth's Abbot and Costello routines; he touches our hearts:
"Whatever became of the moment when one first knew about death?"
     Together they are a team of observers in the looney bin, who don't
have a key or a pass, and who have no idea where the exit lay.
     This is a one-of-a-kind movie.  You simply must see it.  Even
though you may wonder in the end who you are: Rosencrantz or
Guildenstern.  

Title
Review for Doc Hollywood (1991)
     DOC HOLLYWOOD is a movie directed by Michael Caton-Jones.  The
screenplay is by Jeffrey Price, Peter S. Seaman, and Daniel Pyne, based
on the book "What? ... Dead Again?" by Neil B. Shulman, M.D.  It
stars Michael J. Fox, Julie Warner, David Odgen Stiers, Woody Harelson,
and Bridget Fonda.  Rated PG-13, for mature humor and brief nudity.
     DOC HOLLYWOOD is being called by the local newspaper critics
Southern Exposure; apparently the plot is virtually identical to the
current hit TV series "Northern Exposure."  You tell me, since I live in
a TV-free zone (as I like to mention from time to time), but it does
sound remarkably similar.  A young, hot doc on his way to major bucks
instead gets stranded in a looney-bin hick town.  In Fox's case, the
town is Grady, S.C., (admirably played by Micanopy, Fla.), a town
apparently as TV-free as my own living room.  The fantasy nature of DOC
HOLLYWOOD is most evident in the lack of TV or radio or newspapers or
anything else that might connect the loonies of Grady, "The Squash
Capital of the South," "the buckle on the Bible Belt," with the outside
world.  Once Fox misses the freeway access, he and we are in a Twilight
Zone episode, and if you find yourself looking for a pre-cancerous Rod
Serling to smoulder out from behind a porch post saying "For your
consideration," you are on the correct wavelength.
     It's also a little hard to accept Fox as a hotshot, since the only
reason we're given to accept his status as a major surgical talent is
his show-room perfect 1956 Porsche.  On the other hand, Fox is cute,
effortlessly funny, energetic, and entertaining.  (And I note with some
pleasure that neither disease nor accident nor violence is necessary to 
change this snotty, heartless, little prick into a real mensch -- unlike
THE DOCTOR or REGARDING HENRY.)
     Other cast members are well chosen.  Bridget Fonda is the mayor's
daughter, who will do anything to get to L.A.; her performance has a
kind of Fifties ambience to it -- sexy, innocent, open, devious -- and I
find myself liking her a lot.  The mayor is David Ogden Stiers, to whom
the years since the end of M*A*S*H have not been particularly kind, but
who is still capable of a kind of all-out, pedal-to-the-metal
performance.  Julie Warner is very attractive; the first we see of her
is a skinny dipping scene that is probably more than a trifle
gratuitous; it just doesn't make sense dramatically, but as an excuse
for showcasing her beautiful breasts and nates I'm sure many of the
audience felt it worked.  Woody Harelson puts in an interesting
performance as the insurance man who wants to sign up Warner for a life
policy; he also gets off a major funny at the expense of Ted Danson, his
co-star on "Cheers," as I understand it.
     The movie also has a couple of amusing cameos: the director plays
the maitre d'hotel in a Beverly Hills beanery and the head of the
plastic-surgery that Fox wants a job at turns out to be an uncredited
and entirely appropriate choice.  This is not quite the secret as the
ROBIN HOOD cameo, but I can stand not spoiling for you.
     Caton-Jones, the director also of MEMPHIS BELLE, seems quite
comfortable with his Southern locale, despite his own Scottish
nationality.  Unfortunately, the scriptwriters were less than original
overall.  They did manage to come up with a few scenes that really
worked, such as the ultra-romantic scene of Fox and Warner dancing at
the town squash festival, and the tone of the movie in general light,
harmless, and it moves along at a fairly good clip.  It's a little too
long, a little too predictable, a little unmotivated here and there, but
it still manages to provides some entertainment.  And right now in the
dog days of summer releases, that's a lot.
     I recommend DOC HOLLYWOOD to a tolerant viewer who's looking for
some late summer entertainment.  But pay matinee prices, that's all it's
worth, but it is worth that much.

Title
Review for Raising Cain (1992)
     RAISING CAIN is a film directed and written by Brian De Palma.  It
stars John Lithgow, Lolita Davidovich, Steven Bauer, Frances Sternhagen.
Rated R for violence and subject matter.
     RAISING CAIN is a psychological thriller with a sense of humor.  It
is also Brian De Palma's chance to exorcise some his misogynistic
reputation, a reputation enforced by BODY DOUBLE, OBSESSION, and DRESSED
TO KILL.  With Lolita Davidovich's strong, scrappy performance, he
certainly succeeds in that.  But as for his other reputation as a
plagiarist of Hitchcock and others, CAIN is only going to advance the
negative arguments.  There are the almost mandatory allusions to, or
borrowings from, PSYCHO, but there is also Michael Powell's PEEPING TOM
about a killer raised by a sadistic father.  CAIN involves multiple
personalities and a wacko father and a plot to steal children.  In the
process, a little blood is spilt.
     I must say I am of two minds about CAIN.  It is a showy
tour-de-force for De Palma and for John Lithgow, who plays three
characters and five personalities.  Davidovich lets loose with another
of her high-energy performances, even though she is limited to one role.
Other actors include Steven Bauer, as the dark, handsome other man, in a
performance that is most interesting when he has the least amount of
clothes on, and Frances Sternhagen as the shrink-who-explains-it-all
with a goofy Mitteleuropa accent and an even goofier wig (the wig at
least is explained in the story) is tough and cute.
     Sternhagen is also the focus of a four-and-a-half minute tracking
shot through corridors, down stairs, in and out of elevators.  She keeps
making wrong turns and it is pretty funny, but typically ostentatious on
De Palma's part without a lot of rationale; I had to ask myself whether
there wasn't an elevator that would have taken them the whole way.  And
this is a symbol for my most negative feelings about CAIN.  De Palma is
a director of great ambition, but almost no taste, one who thinks tricky
shots, switching lenses, pseudo-Hitchcockian camera angles, and all the
other technical tricks he steals are their own reward, their own
justification.  The camera is just too busy and there is no point to it
with Lithgow and Davidovich knocking themselves out for us in front of
the camera, if they can remember where the damn thing is now.
     There are thrills, chills, laughter, and horror through RAISING
CAIN, but the end effect is purposeless, without any moral center, just
cynical manipulation of the audience and the characters, mere campiness
and vapid technique, and that's always sad and a cheat.
     I can recommend RAISING CAIN with reservations, but definitely
catch a cheap matinee.

Title
Review for Serial Mom (1994)
     SERIAL MOM is a film directed and written by John Waters.  The
cast includes Kathleen Turner, Sam Waterston, Ricki Lake, Traci Lords,
Suzanne Somers, Patricia Hearst, and Mink Stole.  Rated R for violence.
(Also rough language.)
     SERIAL MOM is both a return and a departure for John Waters, the
insightful auteur of bad taste, whose string of midnight classics began
with MULTIPLE MANIACS, reached a climax of a sort in PINK FLAMINGOES,
and continued with FEMALE TROUBLES and DESPERATE LIVING.  Starting with
the 1981 film POLYESTER, famous for its scratch 'n' sniff Odorama cards
if nothing else, Waters moved out of the midnight ghetto; he has since
followed with the musicals HAIRSPRAY and CRY-BABY.  These latter-day
Waters films have their charms, but they lack the over-the-top
grossness and vision of the midnight days.  So to that extent SERIAL
MOM represents something of a return to offensiveness and
truth-telling.  On the other hand, Waters has never had the services of
such a well-known actress as he had in the person of Kathleen Turner.
     Turner has found her metier in SERIAL MOM.  I have the feeling
that lately she has been struggling to find a niche for herself as a
middle-aged woman in an industry that often thinks women are over the
hill and unemployable after 30.  Turner tried the hard-boiled detective
in V. I. WARSHAWSKY and the spy with a child care problem in UNDERCOVER
BLUES, but basically she hasn't had a hit since 1989's WAR OF THE
ROSES.  Of course, we always knew she was a talented comedienne;
ROMANCING THE STONE established that.  And as the title character in
SERIAL MOM she is perfect, unfailingly funny, and as deadly a wielder
of black comedy as she is of pokers and legs of lamb.  She is the last
word in the out of control, self-controlled control freak who insists
that everyone play by her rules.  She never loses her cool or her
confidence.  She knows with an unshakeable surety that one does not
wear white shoes after Labor Day and that the seat belt law must be
obeyed.  She lives in the perfect world of the upper middle class
suburb; she oversees the perfect family.  Nothing must be tolerated to
threaten that perfection.  She makes no effort to cover her crimes and
she gets away with them.  After all, she is right.  Anyone who refuses
to rewind her rental tapes deserves to die; anyone ought to be able to
see that.  Turner never breaks character, never once retreats from the
smug savagery and the complacent campiness of her role.  In the hands
of a lesser actor, the part could have been career suicide.  For
Kathleen Turner, it is likely to be a career revivifier.
     As for Waters, nobody does it better, and it is a genuine pleasure
to have him back behind the camera producing a mainstream version of
his 70s masterpieces.  Waters is a film maker of extraordinary vision
and clarity.  He *sees* America in a way very few do; he makes us laugh
at its viciousness, it violence, its hypocrisy; what else can we do?
And he translates his black vision into films no one else could make,
despite his many imitators who content to go for the gag but not the
content.
     And he continues to give us the pleasure of his company of unique
actors.  We cannot have Divine any longer, but there are still Ricki
Lake, Traci Lords, Mink Stole, and a further collection of wonderful
faces and bodies that have nothing to do with Hollywood.  In this
regard (and others), Waters is America's equivalent of that other
great, gay film maker and visionary Pedro Almodovar, and for me that is
high praise indeed.
     I recommend SERIAL MOM most highly.  Pay what you must; it will be
worth it.

Title
Review for HouseSitter (1992)
     HOUSESITTER is a film directed by Frank Oz and written by Mark
Stein.  It stars Steve Martin, Goldie Hawn, and Dana Delany, with
Richard B. Shull, Laurel Cronin, Julie Harris, and Donald Moffat.
Rated PG, for mature humor, mild profanity.
     HOUSESITTER gives us a one-joke movie that is amusing and
entertaining without actually being anything particularly memorable.  We
have Goldie Hawn in her best role in 20 years as the gifted liar Gwen
(Steve Martin's Newton says, "You're the Ernest Hemmingway of
bullsh*tters!"); I hereby officially and publicly forgive her for BIRD
ON A WIRE.  She is funny and endearing without being silly, stupid, or
reminding us of her bimbette persona from "Laugh-In".  Steve Martin as
the architect who becomes her victim and her partner in her fantasies
has a couple of good set pieces in which he gets to amuse us by
thoroughly embarrassing us -- the gawkiest seduction you've ever
squirmed through and a reluctant crooning of a lullaby in a very
un-lullaby-ish setting.  Then there's Dana Delany (from "China Beach")
who plays Newton's love object, Becky; Becky is a second banana and
introduces a twist on her character at the last moment that doesn't seem
particularly well set up, but Delany appears to an acceptable movie
presence.
     Characterization is the most common problem in Hollywood comedies,
and this one has its share.  The plot is mechanical and completely
predictable, so the interest ought to devolve to the characters, but I
found them mostly either undeveloped or incompletely so.  Gwen is the
most fully developed and in that sense this is Hawn's movie more than
Martin's, although they do seem to work well together.  We see Gwen
working her fantasies and we are given a reason for them and for her
actions; it's not exactly a rigorous analysis, but any attempt to give a
third dimension to her character is welcome.  Martin's Newton is more
problematic.  We are told repeatedly that he is a dreamer, a fantasizer,
a wild and crazy guy, as it were, but what I see is someone thoroughly
pedestrian and little inept socially; it's not that he dreams, he merely
assumes facts not in evidence.  He supposed to have a complicated
relationship with his father (Donald Moffat), but it's mostly an excuse
for Gwen to weave some of her lies and benignly ensnare some more
victims.  Julie Harris plays Newton's mother, but it could have been
played by just about any middle-aged white woman; one of the great
actors of the American theater is completely wasted here.
     There are two really fine supporting performances by Richard
B. Shull and Laurel Cronin as a pair of crazed street people who are
recruited to play Gwen's parents.  They give their small parts their all
and their all is very fine indeed.
     As for the plot, if you've ever seen CHRISTMAS IN CONNECTICUT
you've seen a funnier, faster, and more frantic version of HOUSESITTER.
This movie could have been paced a bit faster and I would not have
minded a bit.  It doesn't quite drag, but it does slow down from time to
time.  It probably doesn't live up to its comedic possibilities and
could do with a touch more confusion and chaos.  Frank Oz might have
turned to the screwball comedies of the 30s for a model that would have
served us all better.
     This is Martin's third movie with Oz (LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS and
DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS).  When Oz turns Martin loose, he does it with
great pacing.  Oz also gets a lot of atmospheric effects out of the
Massachusetts towns, Concord and Cohassett, which provide the kind of
scenery that is almost too lovely to be real.  So far I find myself
being mostly of two minds about Oz's films (although LITTLE SHOP is
nearly perfect).  They seem to be nice, little movies, nothing that
really sticks to the craw or one remembers without a prod or two.
SCOUNDRELS was mostly unable to live up to its trailer, but there's
always the possibility that I'm not hip enough to really get it.  WHAT
ABOUT BOB I thought was mostly silly and irritating that failed to
stretch or challenge its stars.
     So, that's pretty much what have here, a nice little movie that
challenges neither its stars or its audience over much, neither does it
really insult anyone.  I doubt that many of us will remember having seen
it a year from now.
     If you go to HOUSESITTER, and I don't know why you shouldn't, go to
a discount matinee.  That's about the right price.

Title
Review for Toys (1992)
     TOYS is a film directed by Barry Levinson, written by Valerie
Curtin and Barry Levinson.  It stars Robin Williams, Michael Gambon,
Robin Wright, Joan Cusak, LL Cool J, with Donald O'Connor.  It is rated
PG-13, for mild profanity and mature humor.
     TOYS was a disappointment.  I had hoped for something a lot more
energetic, if nothing else.  There is no plot, merely a skeleton on
which to hang a dazzling visual experience.  Michael Gambon and Robin
Williams were both too restrained, too whimsical.  They were both
outshone by Joan Cusak, the only member of the cast who really got the
idea of what they should have been doing.  In fact, the rapper LL Cool J
put in a more interesting performance, even given his inexperience as an
actor.
     Barry Levinson is to blame, of that there can be no doubt.  It was
his idea nearly 15 years ago.  He and his former writing partner Valerie
Curtin wrote the script then; their collaborations include BEST FRIENDS
and JUSTICE FOR ALL, both inferior to his solo writing work (DINER, TIN
MEN) or to the films he only directed (RAIN MAN, BUGSY).  Perhaps, he
should have asked Terry Gilliam to be his script doctor; it definitely
lacks (and needs) that kind of dark imagination.  Levinson is more
interested in making a couple of rather obvious points than in telling a
story.  For example, he rathers earnestly pursues the idea that weapons
are toys for the bloody-minded, that we can choose whether we want our
toys to be life-affirming or lethal.  He gives us some wonderful visual
effects, including a very pointed and chilling scene of generals qua
skeletons.  But, are we to suppose that Barry Levinson thinks that this
is some special vision, some unique insight, vouchsafed only to him that
he can squander so much talent to so little purpose?
     If you want to immerse yourself in Robin Williams' genius for
improvisation, go back to ALADDIN or rent Levinson's GOOD MORNING,
VIETNAM.  You get only a few really memorable Williamsesque moments in
TOYS and long stretches where he has all too little to do.  Williams
gives his all to promoting the film for Levinson and indeed the trailer,
shot in a Spokane wheat field, is vastly better than the movie it
advertises.
     Of the other performers, Joan Cusak is the most memorable in the
role of Williams' sister.  She is otherwordly, fragile, the last word in
gentle space cadets; when her big denouement arrives, we actually can
believe it as earned and established both by the script and by her
performance.  It is one of the few bright spots in the film.  Michael
Gambon, who was so loathsome in THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER
LOVER, is mostly addled here.  His evilness become really clear only too
late in the film, a villain who consults his invalid father and calls
him Daddy; it does not suffice.  Robin Wright as the love interest is
supposed to be a female version of Williams, but she fails to convince.
LL Cool J is blunt and slightly amateurish, but earnest and direct in
the way of gifted amateurs.  He plays Gambon's son and the facts of skin
color and lineage are entertainingly ignored.  Finally, Donald O'Connor
puts in a charming cameo as the dying owner of the Zevo toy company.
     But the real and only star of TOYS is the visual effects, the sets,
the production design, the computer animation, and the wonderful,
wonderful toys.  Everything that TOYS lacks in the way of story it
possesses in abundance in visuals.  It is this aspect of the film, a la
Tim Burton, that gives it any chance at all of surviving as something
like the masterpiece that Levinson clearly had in mind for himself.  And
there is something about TOYS that lingers in the mind.  I woke up this
morning thinking about it, having dreamed about it during the night.
     However, I really cannot recommend TOYS to most of you.  If you
have a strong taste for Robin Williams, if you must see every movie that
Barry Levinson makes, if your primary interest is in the visual effects,
then you will go to TOYS.  A lot of non-specialists, however, will stay
away, unless they find themselves with no other movie and the
possibility of a discount ticket.

Title
Review for Basic Instinct (1992)
     BASIC INSTINCT is a movie by Paul Verhoeven, written by Joe
Eszterhaz.  It stars Michael Douglas, Sharon Stone.  Rated R, for
nudity, sex, and violence.
     BASIC INSTINCT is a difficult movie to write about, for me.  Those
of you who have been kind enough to read my reviews in the past know
that I have often complained about the treatment of gay people in
Hollywood movies, which seldom depict us as other than victims or
maniacs.  Paul Verhoeven (ROBOCOP, TOTAL RECALL, SPETTERS, FLESH &
BLOOD, THE FOURTH MAN) and his newest movie are under a very vocal, high
profile attack by gay, bi, and women's groups.  And I'm not at all sure
where I want to come down in this dispute now that I've actually seen
the film.
     Basically, there isn't that much here to review and the importance
of the film is far outweighed by the activities of its detractors, who
unfortunately are going to sell a lot of tickets for TriStar by making
BASIC INSTINCT a news story.  The film is gripping and involving to a
degree whilst one is actually watching it, but once out of the theater
one is struck by how little there was to it, by the egregious holes and
murkiness in the plot, and by the superficiality of the film.  I don't
feel that trash is important enough to make a cause celebre out of, and
this is a very trashy divertisement.
     It has its moments, no matter how fleeting.  For the afficionado of
the aging, flattening male butt, there's a nude scene involving Michael
Douglas.  There's a delightful guest appearance by Dorothy Malone,
looking well groomed, if not a little craggy.  And most importantly,
there is Sharon Stone, who is kind of like a Madonna who can act.  She's
aggressively sexual, stylish, hip, mocking, and smart.  Ironically, her
character, one that is attracting a lot of the protest energy, is the
best defense of the movie's intentions (as non-homophobic); her
bisexuality is unapologetic, taken for granted, and celebrated as a
strength.
     Michael Douglas's character, a troubled San Francisco homicide
detective, is not particularly attractive or a very compelling apologia
for heterosexuality, by contrast.  He pretty much rapes his ex-lover
(Jeanne Tripplehorn, who makes an interesting performance herself); he
makes a really sleazy, homophobic remark to the Stone character's
lesbian lover; he's basically a loose cannon, a bad cop, and not a very
nice person.  Douglas does all this with his usual delivery.  Indeed, he
is largely repeating his role in FATAL ATTRACTION, right down to his
I'm-so-hot-I-can't-be-denied, love-making attack.
     BASIC INSTINCT is like cotton candy.  Touch it and it melts.  Try
to make sense of the plot, you cannot.  It works only as long as you're
in the dark in its compulsive clutches.  Oh, it looks very good; Jan de
Bont, Verhoeven's cinematographer, delivers a very attractive look.  And
Jerry Goldsmith's music is fine.  But it's all surfaces, a thriller that
cannot stand the light of day.
     I cannot recommend BASIC INSTINCT to you; not because its sexual
politics are held to be controversial by some of my brothers and
sisters, but because it is not a very good movie.  If you must see it,
to find out what all the hubbub is about, go to a cheap matinee.

Title
Review for If Looks Could Kill (1991)
     IF LOOKS COULD KILL, starring Richard Grieco, will be a very
amusing $2 rental in the video store.  At $3.50 matinee rates, it still
provided some honest laughs but I cannot recommend it to anyone who can
wait a while (a short while judging from the three other people in the
auditorium at the Friday 5 PM showing) to see this personable, hunky guy
with great pecs and good definition in the tummy spend a five-minute
scene in rather abbreviated jockey shorts.  Obviously, I couldn't.
     The movie, which hardly merits a serious review, is a parody of
secret-agent flicks and especially of GOLDFINGER, my favorite Bond
movie.  Like the old Punch cartoon of the country vicar being served bad
eggs by his bishop: "Parts are excellent."  And indeed, the movie romps
along powered by the idea of a wise-guy going to France with his
French-teacher-from-Hell and the French Club to make up his French
class; he is immediately mistaken for Secret Agent Man who in the first
of many coincidences has assumed the same name as the Grieco character.
The bad guys include Linda Hunt, having a lot of fun with a bad German
accent and a gold whip that does double duty as her necklace.
     The scene where Grieco tours the weapons lab and get his shiny new
gadgets including a Bondian sports car is pretty rich.  Unfortunately,
the movie slows down occasionally to take itself a little seriously, to
introduce the love element, and to make room for a couple of MTV videos.
The woman who plays the French teacher is rather wonderful as is the
madman intent on stealing all the gold in Europe, Hunt's boss (?).
     Also unfortunate is the skimpy special effects budget and enough
editing errors to fuel r.a.m. for a year.

Title
Review for Doors, The (1991)
     Oliver Stone and Val Kilmer have done it, they have captured
perfectly the feel of my Sixties in the new film THE DOORS, a film which
will surely be on many ten-best lists come December and which ought to
be in for several important Academy nominations unless the curse of
spring release strikes again.
     Stone has always shown the most amazing talent for recreating the
look and feel of that turbulent time, as he did in PLATOON and BORN ON
THE FOURTH OF JULY.  But Stone's movies have always been flawed by what
a friendly reviewer might see as an excess of zeal and an unfriendly one
as the sledge-hammer approach to making a point.  But, unlike his
earlier films, THE DOORS does not seem to have a political point it
wants to drive home above all other considerations; it definitely lacks
Stone's usual smug superiority and instead concentrates on making Jim
Morrison live for us again in the form of Val Kilmer.  
     Val Kilmer is the second actor this late winter/early spring who
absolutely must be nominated for an Academy Award (the other being
Anthony Hopkins in THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS).  What price did Kilmer
have to pay to so perfectly become the driven, visionary, besotted
Morrison, the Bacchus and Orpheus of many in my generation?  I was
impressed the last time I saw Kilmer, in a little film noir about a
failing detective who gets involved with a devious thief and murderer
played by his wife Joyce Whalley-Kilmer.  I had no notion of what the
man was capable of as an actor.  What he does by way of becoming
Morrison goes beyond acting into black magic.  He looks like Morrison,
he sounds like Morrison even to doing  Morrison's vocals on top of the
original Doors' instrumental tracks, he moves like Morrison.  He scares
us and disgusts us and fascinates us even as Jim Morrison did.
     The film takes a mostly unblinking look at the demon that drove
Morrison.  It offers no insights or answers.  It merely says this is him
in action, make what you will of it.  Unfortunately, one result is that
the other Doors are unfairly neglected, especially Ray Manzarek, played
here by Kyle MacLachlan; Manzarek was probably the unindicted
co-conspirator who as much as Morrison made the unique and unnerving
Doors sound.  The other two Doors were Robby Krieger (Frank Whaley,
Joyce's brother(?)) and John Densmore (Kevin Dillon), both of whom play
rather minor roles.
     Morrison is important as an artist in his own right, but for the
movie his significance is that of the supreme type, the very summation
and embodiment, of the Sixties rock culture.  He is a cultural icon and
as such is as mixed a bag as my own memories of those times--terror and
ecstasy, living on the edge and barely conscious, all at the same time.
We see and judge Morrison and the times on the strength of the music,
the words, the actions, the script, the photography, and the sound
track.  
     Stone and J. Randal Johnson wrote a wonderful script that 
captures the essence fully and honestly.  The script gives exactly the
right moments we need.  The pacing makes the 135-minute running time
both timeless and instantaneous--exactly the way I used to perceive or
be deceived by time when I was stoned on acid in those days.
     The music is in some ways the story and Densmore and Krieger were
involved creatively in the making of the movie, I note.  There are 28
Doors songs in the sound track (and a heavy promotion in the music
stores).  The concert scenes are perfect.  I sat there in the dark
saying Yes, this is the way it was, this is how it felt.
     As for the photography, it is bold, imaginative, and innovative.
Like the concerts, the drug trips are real, exactly right.  It's taken
more than two decades since Hollywood started trying to film a trip
before someone got it right; even the trips in EASY RIDER fail to
convince and evoke the way these do.  And then there are the
hallucinogenic figures that accompany Morrison, his shaman, the bald
figure, enigmatic, suggestive, seen only by Morrison and us and maybe
once by Pam Morrison, played wonderfully well by Meg Ryan, who has never
been one of my personal faves--until now.  The film's attitude to drugs
and to alcohol, for Morrison was an alcoholic as much as a druggie, is
accepting without being approving; these people were stoned more or less
all the time and it killed some of them.  But whether Morrison could
have been Morrison without them is not a question the movie is
interested in.
     Will THE DOORS speak to people who weren't hippies and/or Doors
fans?  I suspect it will.  For people like me, it speaks loudly and
clearly.  I recommend this movie to everyone except those who cannot
tolerate rough language, sex, drug use, and/or frontal nudity in their
films or their lives.

Title
Review for 3 Men and a Little Lady (1990)
     This is the sequel to THREE MEN AND A BABY, which was based on the
French film, THREE MEN AND A CRADLE (TRES HOMMES ET LA COUCHIN(?)).
Like the previous American film, this was one stars Tom Selleck, Steve
Guttenberg, and Ted Danson.  And like the previous American film -- both
are Touchstone films, Touchstone being Disney's "adult" division -- it
is an amiable, innocuous charmer, a fantasy in which everyone has all
the money he or she needs but no one has to work very hard.
     Unlike the French original, neither American film has any of the
underlayment of grit, human weakness, questions of responsibility, or of
the role of men in the upraising of our children.  In other words, the
American film went for the poop and left out the shit.
     Fortunately, in the current vehicle, the baby is ready for school
and long past the occasions for the unending and unendurable sight gags
based on infantile incontinence.
     Indeed, the given of the film is that three men cannot continue to
be a corporate daddy to one child; the time has come for
conventionalizing the child's family and home situation.  The big
question here is who is going to marry the mommy, thus completing the
total sell-out of the original film (TRES HOMMES).
     Given the fact that this sequel is as mindless and backboneless as
any major American comedy of the current crop, it is attractive,
pleasant, and easy to take.  Tom Selleck shines forth with all his star
power; Danson does some amusing turns in various costumes, and
Guttenberg smiles winningly in the background, but has virtually nothing
to do.
     One really nice element is the little lady of the title.  She's
pretty, nice, believable, neither health-threateningly saccharine or
preternaturally bratty; she's smart, but not alarmingly so.
     I can recommend THREE MEN AND A LITTLE LADY to anyone needing a
little R & R while Christmas shopping.

Title
Review for Where Angels Fear to Tread (1991)
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD is a film directed by Charles Sturridge.
The script was written by Sturridge, Tim Sullivan, and Derek Granger,
from the novel by E.M. Forster.  It stars Helena Bonham Carter, Judy
Davis, Rupert Graves, Giovanni Guidelli, Barbara Jefford, and Helen
Mirren.  Cinematography is by Michael Coulter, and the production design
by Simon Holland.  Rated PG, due to subject matter.
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD proves that the works of E.M. Forster
are not the exclusive property of the Merchant-Ivory juggernaut (which
will be rolling out HOWARD'S END shortly).  Charles Sturridge (A HANDFUL
OF DUST) and his collaborators have produced a splendid and faithful
translation of Forster's first novel to the screen.  Sturridge has
managed to round out some of Forster's cardboard-cutout characters, as
well as to bring out Forster's great, but often neglected, gift for
comedy.  But most of all he has given a strong actors' film that
breathes with a life of its own.
     Many of the principals are veterans of other Forster adaptations,
but here they turn in individualized performances that sometimes rise,
as in the case of Rupert Graves, to a career best.  Judy Davis was in A
PASSAGE TO INDIA, Graves in A ROOM WITH A VIEW and MAURICE, Helen Bonham
Carter in A ROOM WITH A VIEW and the upcoming HOWARD'S END.
     Rupert Graves gives us his personal best as the ineffectual, but
kindly, Phillip Herriton.  Phillip tells us that "Some people are born
not to do things."  It is his moral situation that more is the center of
the story.  His actions and words, his inaction and silence, start and
end the drama.  He has a wonderful scene involving opera and loosening
his Edwardian respectability, but he also has to face up to the price to
be paid.  He does so poignantly, full of love and friendship, in a
moving, yet light-handed, performance.
     Helena Bonham Carter works against type to some degree here.  No
mad scenes for her this time, although she is very angry.  Her
characterization of the quiet, fuming Caroline Abbot is rich and
restrained.
     Quite the opposite performance is registered by the inestimable
Judy Davis, who has become one of my favorite performers only since
IMPROMPTU, more shame on me.  Although she's been making films for years
(MY BRILLIANT CAREER, 1979, being her debut credit, I believe) and I've
seen her without focusing in on her as a personality.  This is no doubt
a tribute (of sorts) to her remarkable skills at characterization.  Her
Harriet Herriton is strait-laced, no-nonsense, embittered, provincial,
narrow, selfish, hysterical, and at times uproariously funny.  Davis's
bag of physical tricks include tics, tsk-tsks, tears, flinches, and a
body held more rigidly than any corset could ever have managed.
     Helen Mirren plays Lilia, the doomed in-law of the Herritons.  She
is sexy and earthy, a tiny rebel against both the superficialities and
rigidities of the England she flees and the Italy she finds a kind of
refuge in.  Mirren and Davis are great beauties, who, because they are
also great actors, can turn their beauty off and on to suit the moment.
Davis especially achieves a terrible pinched look, but Mirren can look
worn out and used as her life unravels.
     WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD is foremost a social comedy that asks
something very serious of us -- that we take part in life whatever the
risks, that nothing is worse or more dangerous than the bystander.  I
recommend it strongly, no matter what the ticket price.

Title
Review for Ballad of the Sad Cafe, The (1991)
     THE BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE is directed by Simon Callow and produced
by Ismail Merchant.  It stars Vanessa Redgrave, Keith Carradine, Cork
Hubbert, Rod Steiger.  It was written by Michael Hirst (borrowing on
Edward Albee's 1963 Broadway play version) and adapted from Carson
McCullers's 1943 novella of the same name.
     Carson McCullers was a writer of mysterious, gloomy Southern
gothics.  She was a frail, tormented author, who died in 1963, whose
three major novels have been translated to film with unusual fidelity (A
MEMBER OF THE WEDDING, 1953; REFLECTIONS IN A GOLDEN EYE, 1967; THE
HEART IS A LONELY HUNTER, 1968).  This tradition continues in the fourth
major treatment, THE BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE, which she wrote at the age
of 24.
     The film, produced by Ismail Merchant, was directed by one of the
great contemporary English actors, Simon Callow, who many of us best
know as the Rev. Beebe in ROOM WITH A VIEW.  Callow, in a recent
interview, said that Southern literature has a strong attraction to the
British because both locales have essentially rural, agricultural
cultures.  Be that as it may, Callow has served McCullers very well,
preserving the odd, isolated sadness and gothic extremism of the
original, as well as the weird flashes of humor.  The production design
is by Bruno Santini, who gives us a gritty, dirt-poor, spiritually
worn-out version of the South (the movie was shot in Texas, btw).  The
score is the haunting work of Richard Robbins, and the cinematography of
Walter Lassally emphasizes the other-wordliness of the story.
     The star of SAD CAFE is Vanessa Redgrave, who, as one of Seattle's
newspaper critics put it, was born to play Miss Amelia.  Miss Amelia is
tall, strong, rawboned, the richest person for miles around, who
completely dominates the local landscape otherwise inhabited by
zombie-like millworkers and farmhands.  She owns the town store, the
cotton plantation, the local still, gives out home remedies, and coldly
repossesses a family's sewing machine to settle a $2 debt.  She is a
tyrant, a feudal ruler, who is caught in the memories of her dead
parents, living in their house/store, fingering their mementoes.
Redgrave captures this mysterious, inexplicable, unknowable character
completely with her scowl, her loping stride (in a wedding dress!), her
tomboy blonde hair; she is power, strength, irrational, autonomous, and
unchallenged.
     Keith Carradine (Marvin Macey) is the local bad boy who becomes
obsessed with Miss Amelia and marries her in one of the funniest and
oddest courtships and marriages you will ever see.  Carradine is a
great favorite of mine and he has never been better, at least since
CHOOSE ME.  He is run out of Miss Amelia's life once and returns to
settle the score in a fight scene that ought to put Arnie et al to
shame.  As the husband, Carradine is weak and placating; as the avenging
demon, he is powerful and irresistible.
     The third element in the story is Lymon, a "bro'back" (hunchback
dwarf), Miss Amelia's putative cousin, and the only one who calls her
Amelia and can order her around.  He is the one who gets the idea to
change the store to a cafe as way to amuse himself and to ensure company
to help him get through the nights he so fears.
     It is the cafe that brings Miss Amelia and the town to life.  As
Earl Hindman who plays one of the townspeople says: "I'm not worth much
in this world, but now I feel good."  It is Lymon who is instantly
obsessed with Marvin Macey, who is obsessed in one way or another with
Miss Amelia, who is obsessed with Lymon.  Lymon is played to great
effect by Cork Hubbert.  Like all literary hunchbacks and dwarfs,
Lymon's affliction is an outward manifestation of a spiritual
brokenness.  His appearance is one justification for McCullers and
critics to call SAD CAFE a fairy tale.  Hubbert plays up his part with
the energy and detemination that far exceeds his stature and becomes the
Satan, or at least the familiar, of the piece.
     Rod Steiger in the expanded role of the preacher has a long speech
about the lover and the "be-love" which is supposed to explain the
action (the one who is loved more than loves grows to hate the lover
etc.), but honestly I think it's a red herring.  The real explanation,
pour moi, is power.  Each of the principals cannot love or respect
anyone who is less powerful than him or herself, but has to destroy this
other, less powerful person in order to establish his or her own power.
Strictly pecking-order stuff.  I don't see any love here, only power, or
the lack of power.  Maybe power is love in this crooked, twisted world
of McCullers's South.
     SAD CAFE is a remarkable film with memorable performances.  It is a
fit counternote to the big-budget, low-character summer hits.  I can
recommend it highly, even at full ticket price, to any adult film goer.

Title
Review for City Slickers (1991)
     CITY SLICKERS is a movie by Ron Underwood, written by Lowell Ganz
and Babaloo Mandel, and starring Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, and Bruno
Kirby, with Jack Palance, Patricia Wettig, and Helen Slater.
     CITY SLICKERS is a very funny, very touching film that compares
favorably with Billy Crystal's WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  Indeed, both films
concentrate at their hearts on pretty much the same concern, a
redefinition of manhood and manliness, within the context of sustained
hilarity.  CITY SLICKERS is an amiable, well-intentioned, feel-good,
irresistible, and heartfelt comedy.
     Indeed, the cattle drive hadn't even begun and the muscles in my
face were already sore from non-stop grinning.  Which may be a
reflection how little smiling I do these days.
     Billy Crystal has been a favorite of mine since the Seventies when
he played the token gay man on TV's SOAP.  Over the years, he's gotten
funnier and no less attractive for being older.  He mugs the camera, he
throws away priceless one-liners like a maharajah scattering coins, he 
keeps us gasping as we struggle with his wise-guy, city-boy energy and
wit; he's pretty much limited to playing Billy  Crystal but for me
that's enough.  In CITY SLICKERS he's as good as he's ever gotten; his
angst over aging, over being stuck in a meaningless job, is real
without being pushed to new histrionic heights.  Crystal emotes by 
cracking wise and here he cracks very wise indeed.
     His two buddies are a supermarket manager (Daniel Stern) bullied by
his wife and father-in-law/boss and a gravel-voiced macho-man (Bruno
Kirby) who drives his friends to take vacations from common
sense--running the bulls at Pamplona and driving cattle from Colorado to
New Mexico.  Both actors are effective and appealing.  Stern is an
owl-eyed, life-shocked victim, a man who everyone agrees has no life.
Kirby, a veteran supporting actor, may find his role a break-away part
for his career; he is self-protecting, vulnerable, a tough guy whose
afraid, and immensely appealing.
     (The three of them are first seen in an opening sequence that is
part of the credits and may well be one of the funniest credits
sequences I've ever seen.  Funny and altogether appropriate to the
story to come.)
     Even more appealing is the camaraderie between the three men.  They
compete, they criticize, they occasionally dislike each other, but
always they love each other.  And it is the real strength of CITY
SLICKERS.
     Of the supporting parts, only that of Palance is really memorable.
The women are largely irrelevant in this "men's movie"; Wettig and
Slater are perfectly fine, but their parts are small.  However, it is
wonderful to see Jack Palance again, even though he looks and sounds
very sick.  He sounds like he has emphysema, gasping for every breath,
and his skin looks waxy and translucent.  Palance has been making
Westerns since SHANE, and his mere silhouette encapsulates the entire
mythos of the West for this viewer.  There is a very special scene
between Palance and Crystal that is going to be on several posters'
lists of special movie moments.
     The story idea is said to have been Crystal's.  It was worked up by
a veteran writing team, Mandel and Ganz (SPLASH, PARENTHOOD, NIGHT
SHIFT), and the script is definitely a strength here.  They create comic
situations that are more than funny, they also inform us about the
characters.  Underwood's (TREMORS) direction also helps the film capture
the agony of characters who find that their lives don't offer anything
other than loss and dissolution.  There is also some wonderful Western
locale photography.
     CITY SLICKERS isn't going to challenge you; it isn't an
intellectual heavyweight.  Instead, it's life-affirming, meaningful,
funny, skillful, heart-warming, and ingratiating.  I got my money's worth
and more and I recommend CITY SLICKERS, even at full price.

Title
Review for Innocent Blood (1992)
     INNOCENT BLOOD is a film directed by John Landis and written by
Michael Wolk.  It stars Anne Parillaud, Robert Loggia, Anthony LaPaglia,
Don Rickles, with cameos by Sam Raimi, Frank Oz, and Alfred Hitchcock.
Rated R, for graphic vampirism, language, violence, and simulated sex.
     INNOCENT BLOOD is No. 2 in this fall's vampire cycle.  As such it
falls thematically and stylistically between the deliberately dumb BUFFY
THE VAMPIRE SLAYER and the big-budget earnestness that I am expecting
from the upcoming DRACULA from the always over-the-top Francis Ford
Coppola.  INNOCENT BLOOD is a very smart black comedy that gives us a
fresh twist on this most hackneyed of subgenres, the vampire film,
without being a spoof or send-up.  (My copy of VIDEO HOUND'S GOLDEN
MOVIE RETRIEVER 1991 lists almost 120 video titles under the rubric
"Vampires" as well as 18 under "Vampire Spoof.")  The result is a very
enjoyable film, indeed, as a black comedy, as a horror film, and as an
interesting and sexy love story.  It does fail to deliver much in the
way of suspense, however, except in the first encounter between the
vampire, Marie, and her food.  It does deliver a sense of wonder and
amazement, some interesting, well-drawn characters, an intelligent
story, and an amazing amount of fun.
     The credit for the success goes first of all to John Landis, the
director who brought us AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON and TWILIGHT
ZONE--THE MOVIE, inter alia.  I understand that Landis has a current TV
series that uses a lot of film clips ("Dream On").  INNOCENT BLOOD is
likewise populated with lots of TVs showing old horror films.  We see
Bela Lugosi and Christopher Lee clips, we see THE BEAST FROM 20,000
FATHOMS and KONGA clips, we see Dan Quayle (who gets a credit in the
final cast list).  Even security guards are watching commercial TV, not
their surveillance monitors.  Landis takes the script of first-time
screenwriter Michael Wolk to create a sense of wonder and amazed
disbelief, of curiosity, as well as a series of running gags and telling
details about a vampire with a social conscience, a vampire who
experiences post-prandial letdown, a vampire who sometimes needs sex
more than blood, a vampire who can be trusted by good guys, at least.
     Anne Parillaud, the recent star of LA FEMME NIKITA, takes to the
role of Marie with both delicacy and ferocity.  Our first sight of her
is of her totally nude, hungry, brooding in her candle-lit hideaway.
Her voice-over enunciates her three rules, with convincing
demonstrations.  Then she breaks one of her own rules and all hell
breaks lose, as it were.  Parillaud is quite wonderful as Marie, very
sexy, very tough, at times voluptuous, at times boyish, alternately the
innocent and the enthusiastic pleasure-seeker.
     Her opposite and partner is played by Anthony LaPaglia, who is
himself quite attractive in an unconventional way.  We don't get see
quite as much of his nude body as we do of Parillaud's, but he certainly
has his own charms.  He's also a pretty good actor in his role as the
undercover cop who joins up with a pretty vampire he can't trust to get
a mafioso turned vampire himself.
     Robert Loggia, as the monstrous Sally the Shark, has the best time
of all.  Loggia electrifies every scene he's in with an amazing energy
that rises to a memorable and visually dazzling climax of hubris.
     The supporting cast is a lot of fun.  Especially enjoyable is Don
Rickles, who plays Sal's mouthpiece, and has a unforgettable final
scene.  Really, any film that makes me like Don Rickles has got to be a
remarkable film.  Also appearing are Sam Raimi, the director of EVIL
DEAD, in a meat locker, and Frank Oz, the director of the musical
version of LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, as a very droll autopsist.  Alfred
Hitchcock does a cameo via the small scene as he wrestles his big fiddle
in STRANGERS ON A TRAIN.
     Some of you may find the homages clutter up the film and get in the
way of the narrative.  For me they worked as a commentary that said
this film is not entirely a mere vampire film.  There is a theme of
disease and of safe sex that is explicit in the wonderful sequence where
Marie and her revolted-attracted partner are forced to wait out the
daylight in a cheap motel.  Certainly, Marie's food found out to their
regret that encounters with her were the last word in unsafe sex.
     I recommend INNOCENT BLOOD highly.  It is well worth even a
full-price ticket.  However, it is unsuitable for children and for the
truly squeamish.

Title
Review for Awakenings (1990)
     Penny Marshall, the director of AWAKENINGS, has a way with actors,
as anyone who has seen BIG will attest.  The actors in this case are
Robin Williams as a painfully shy doctor in a so-called chronic hospital
in the Bronx, Robert De Niro as one of his patients whom he awakens from
a decades-long "absence," Julie Kavner as Williams' nurse and supporter,
an ensemble of wonderful character actors as other patients, and finally
real-life patients in a real-life hospital.
     The hospital is not ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST; sadism and
power are not the problems when Williams shows up, albeit reluctantly,
as the new doc-on-the-block.  The problem is routine, lack of curiosity,
acceptance of the received wisdom about warehousing the chronics,
presumably untreatable victims of unknowable mental disorders.  John
Heard puts in an appearance as the stern, slightly cynical head doctor,
whose job, it seems, is to rain on everyone's parade.  (This is the same
John Heard who played a similarly grim therapist in the Dyan Cannon
movie I saw in previews earlier this last week.)
     This is a movie that I think will stay with one for a long time
because the story is so intriguing and the performances so strong.
Williams discovers by accident that a group of patients who appear to
totally out of communication with our world are maintaining slender
threads of contact.  He deduces a connection with an encephalitis
epidemic in the 1920s and a possible cure in a new drug, L-DOPA (this
being 1969).  Williams experiments on De Niro, who awakens to find that
30 years of his life have disappeared.  There is much of interest in the
reactions of the patient and the family to this situation, the loving
mother who doesn't really want her little boy to not need her, the man
who finds that his family has disappeared in various way while he was
"away," and so forth.
     Williams plays against type and plays very well, with hardly any of
his comic persona peeping through.  He is never given a chance to
extemporize, a la GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM, and turns an understated,
disciplined performance.  (Julie Kavner, his nurse, is her reliably
wonderful self, just as we've seen in so many Woody Allen movies and 
elsewhere; but she is pretty much playing her same stock character,
delightful as it is, in contrast to Williams.)
     De Niro turns an amazingly detailed performance in a highly
physical role of a man once total rigid like a statue, then gradually
loosening up, learning to move again, then as the cure wears off,
developing alarming tics and contortions of a body out of control.  The
only problem with De Niro's performance is that is De Niro, who may be
too familiar a talent for us ever to forget that this is De Niro turning
in another Oscar-nomination performance.
     Some of the character actors that I would like mention en passant
include Anne Meara, who was once, I believe, a stand-up comic, the late
Dexter Gordon as the patient who will not or cannot speak except through
his piano playing, and a particularly splendid Alice Drummond who has
one of the best lines in the movie about knowing that the year is 1969
but needing it to be 1926 (the year she "went to sleep").
     Some have complained that the movie suffers from an unnatural
symmetry with De Niro trapped in his body and Williams trapped in his
shyness and the two of them awakening to life, trying to help each
other.  I find this to be a thematic strength in the movie, the kind of
quality that raises it above the disease-of-the-month club.  It gives
the movie meaning and resonance for all of us with message of
appreciating life and having the courage to fight for it, a message not
that different from the carpe diem theme of DEAD POETS SOCIETY, Robin
Williams' second best movie to date.
     I recommend AWAKENINGS.  It is a strange and haunting story,
excellently presented.  You will very likely want to see more than once
in fact.

Title
Review for Howards End (1992)
     HOWARD'S END is a film directed by James Ivory, produced by Ismail
Merchant, and written by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, from the novel by
E. M. Forster.  It stars Anthony Hopkins, Vanessa Redgrave, Helena
Bonham Carter, Emma Thompson, Samuel West, Nicola Duffett, and Joseph
Bennet.  Rated PG for mature themes.
     HOWARD'S END is the latest and, I think, the best film yet from the
team of Merchant, Ivory, and Jhabvala.  Their previous collaborations,
of course, include two other Forster novels (ROOM WITH A VIEW and
MAURICE), MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE, and THE BOSTONIANS (my least favorite).
It doesn't hurt anyone that the source novel is Forster's masterpiece,
but a less gifted writer than Jhabvala could easily have gotten lost in
the many layers and characters, the scope, of the original.  She is
faithful to the spirit of the novel, she gives literal renditions of
individual scenes and fearlessly condenses other pages into a gesture or
a line of dialogue.  The result is light, effortless, graceful, lively,
funny, fascinating, and alarming.  The production values are high,
precise, and convincing.  Ivory's direction is delicate and evocative.
And the actors constitute a dream cast.
     First, let us praise Vanessa Redgrave as Ruth Wilcox, the ethereal,
the glad-to-be-protected, the ailing, the intensely passionate, the
owner of Howard's End, the country house at the heart of the story.
Redgrave's part is a short one, but it is a characterization of such
strength and originality as to be sure to stay with you for a long time
to come.  Ruth's unwordliness and fragility come through in such things
as her slow, gravely impassioned speech.  As the materfamilias of the
nouveau riche Wilcoxes, she cares only for Howard's End; it alone is the
family home, despite all the residential properties her husband owns.
The opening scene is of Ruth walking in the moonlight at Howard's End,
and Redgrave tells us everything in the way she walks, wraithlike,
floating in her heavy, trailing evening gown.
     Anthony Hopkins also gives a devastating portrait of Henry Wilcox,
the great man of business, the prig, the hypocrite, the keeper of secret
guilts, the fragile monster.  If Hopkins is not the best male actor in
the English-language cinema, he is surely in the running; he brings to
life an unsympathetic character in a way wholly different from the
intense scene-chewing of his Hannibal Lecter.  He even looks like a
wholly different person.
     But it is Emma Thompson, seen last year in HENRY V and DEAD AGAIN,
who is the heart and soul of this movie and who has the most difficult
role.  She plays Margaret Schlegel, the older of the two sisters, wise,
patient, dotty, witty, cultured, civilized.  Margaret's friendship with
Ruth is the one pure love of the story, but her involvement with the
dreadful Wilcox is the great mystery of the story.  Thompson illuminates
every scene she is in with her grace and civility.  Margaret is a
breakthrough role for her, especially since the overwhelming Kenneth
Branaugh, her husband, is nowhere in evidence here.
     Helena Bonham Carter evinces a breakthrough all her own.  Gone is
the pouty ingenue.  Instead, here we have an angry, mature woman, who is
fearlessly honest and who insists that everyones take responsibility for
his or her actions.  As Helen Schlegel, she walks the thin line between
radicalness and madness.  She is as much the modern woman as Margaret is
the old-fashioned one, and they are the only two uncorrupted characters
in the story.  It is as if Helen's vision leads her past the confusion
of the transitional Edwardian society that her contemporaries are caught
up in and onto a more frightening, lonelier, more honest world.
     The other actors are each much to be commended, especially Nicola
Duffett, Samuel West, and Prunella Scales in particular.  Duffet plays
the tartish Julie Bast; her great scene is in the tea tent at an
ostentatious society wedding.  West plays Leonard Bast, the victim of
class prejudice and interfering do-gooders; Bast is a clerk with
aspirations to rise above his station.  He is proud but foolish, stuffy
and passionate, caught in the trap of trying to do the right thing with
only novels to tell what that is.  Scales is fluffy and lovable as the
Devon aunt of the Schlegel sisters.  (By the way, Simon Callow, a
Merchant-Ivory regular, makes a cameo appearance as a pompous lecturer.)
     Besides the acting, I highly recommend both the music and the
cinematography.  Alas, I have the name of neither director in front of
me.  Let me say merely that HOWARD'S END is as much a delight to the eye
and ear as to the intellect.
     I high recommend HOWARD'S END, even at full ticket price.

Title
Review for Grand Canyon (1991)
     GRAND CANYON is a film by Lawrence Kasdan.  From a script by
Lawrence and Meg Kasdan.  It stars Kevin Kline, Steve Martin, Mary
McDonnell, Danny Glover, Mary-Louise Parker, Aifre Woodward.  It is rate
R due to language.
     Of the films I've seen recently, GRAND CANYON is most like CITY OF
HOPE.  GRAND CANYON has a large, ensemble cast who act out a veritable
anthology of interconnected storylines.
     However, this film lasts the political sensibilities of John
Sayles' film and it lacks that epic feel.  Kasdan's film is a much
smaller film in the sense that it doesn't offer us some of the
directorial and editing pyrotechnics of Sayles' film and in the sense
that Kasdan does not try to manage anywhere near as large a bundle of
threads.
     Yet, GRAND CANYON is anything but modest in its intentions, its
meaning or meanings, or its effect on the audience.  I take its subject
to be the meaning of chaos, and how to live with it.  Its message is,
inter alia, that life is shitty and dangerous and a lot of bad things
happen to us, but if we can manage to survive the bad things long enough
something wonderful, miraculous will also happen to us every now and
then.  Not too assuring as messages go, but it seems to describe my
life.  Certainly, incorporating concepts of chaos seems like a good idea
in modern life.  
     GRAND CANYON is by and large an enjoyable and original film, a film
that is somehow better than it ought to have been.  It is a personal
film for the Kasdans; one of its central episode is directly out of
Lawrence Kasdan's own life.  It is a very entertaining film with
excellent, ensemble performances  from some of Hollywood's most
recognizable stars.
     Kevin Kline and Mary McDonnell are the central couple.  They both
turn in interesting, intelligent, and film-saving performances.  They
have to rise above their yuppie characters, their quasi-mystical lines,
and their dubious relationships to establish their characters as real
people that are worth caring about.  Miraculously, they do it all.  When
McDonnell gets around to her speech on believing in miracles, she is
totally convincing.  And they are both very funny in the right places.  
     (Incidentally, Kline has a dream that is the occasion for the best,
most naturalistic dream sequence I've ever seen in a movie.)
     Danny Glover also registers an excellent performance as the
philosophical, brave tow-truck driver.  His sister is played by Tina
Lifford, who has a couple of showcase scenes, but who has less of an
opportunity to be fully established as a real character.  Similarly,
some of the other secondary characters, mostly women, suffer similar
fates of being only half-developed, in particular, Mary-Louise Parker as
a whiny secretary who finally figures it out, and Alfre Woodward as the
blind date.
     But the real star of the film has got to be Steve Martin playing a
schlock-film director, a glib, loquacious, rationalizing creator of
ultra-violent flicks, in the name of honesty.  It is said that his
character is a parody of Joel Silver, director of THE LAST BOY SCOUT.
Martin is becoming an actor of amazing pureness and transparency.
     GRAND CANYON is worth at least two viewings.  The first viewing may
leave you a little confused and even depressed.  But the second will
reveal to you a film of amazing, subtle powers, seamlessness, and
perfection, realistic but hopeful, a snapshot of the amazing mess we're
in.
     I recommend, obviously, GRAND CANYON, even at full price.

Title
Review for Hero (1992)
     HERO is a film directed by Stephen Frears, from a script by David
Webb Peoples.  It stars Dustin Hoffman, Geena Davis, Andy Garcia, with
Joan Cusak, Kevin J. O'Connor, James Madio, and with uncredited cameos
by Edward Herrman, Fisher Stevens, and Chevy Chase.  Rated PG-13, due to
mild profanity, mature subject matter.
     HERO is Stephen Frears's third Hollywood movie, the earlier two
being DANGEROUS LIAISONS and THE GRIFTERS.  Frears previously directed
the British films THE HIT, MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, and PRICK UP YOUR
EARS.  HERO is far and away his most "Hollywood" film, evoking as it
must, the films of Frank Capra.  But of course, Capra was enough of his
own artist, enough outside the Hollywood mainstream, that his is one of
the few directorial names transformed into a defining adjective by the
critics: Chaplinesque, Hitchcockian, Fellini-esque, Spielbergian,
Capra-esque.  You will be particularly reminded of MEET JOHN DOE when
you go to HERO; as Bernie LaPlante (Dustin Hoffman) says repeatedly,
trust me on this.  Frears manages to bring off a bold updating of the
Capra-esque vision of the common person as the unsung hero.  John Bubber
(Andy Garcia), in his turn, says more than once everyone is a hero, but
then John Bubber is a liar.  Some have called Frears's film cynical.  I
say rather that he is more grounded in our contemporary sense of the
ironic.
     The story, written by David Webb Peoples, balances the comedy of a
very sharp media satire with the heart-warming story about the nature of
heroism.  The story is slow and deliberate getting going -- a Frears
trademark -- but once the foundations are laid, everything proceeds
quickly and quirkily, rich in character development, in emotion and
laughs, all laid on by three nearly perfect performances.
     Another of the things that makes HERO a Hollywood movie, to a
greater degree than DANGEROUS LIAISONS or THE GRIFTERS, is the star
power of his cast.  Although Glenn Close or Anjelica Huston has an
undeniably Hollywood star power, the subject matter and source materials
of the earlier movies are sufficiently outside the mainstream as to make
them look and feel rather like imports or independents with larger
budgets than normal.  But here in HERO we have one of Hollywood's living
legends, Dustin Hoffman, playing opposite two of the hottest younger
stars working today, Geena Davis, fresh from twin successes in THELMA &
LOUISE and A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, and Andy Garcia, who knocked offf
everyone's socks in the last GODFATHER movie and is generally seen as
quite the cutie.
     Garcia, as the homeless, undecorated Vietnam War veteran becomes
the perfect hero, plays his role with great dignity and strength,
becoming a real hero.  He exudes the moral sweat of a man who is doing
the wrong thing for the right reason and turning a dishonest act into
one of high purpose and effect.  In a word, he's trapped, and no one
really wants him to escape.
     Geena Davis, as Gale Galey, begins as the ultimate in electronic
sob sisters (Chevy Chase, her boss, says, "Everyone knows you're a
marshmallow, now act like a professional marshmallow), but ends as a
real person whose job is TV news.  Davis, of course, looks fantastic,
and her acting is likewise praiseworthy.  She is endearing, dignified,
funny, suitably world-weary, suitably desperate, heartbreaking as she
warms to the idea of a hero, first as the one good story she always
wanted to report, then as an inspiration that transform her own life.
     (Look, by the way, for a hilarious performance by Kevin
J. O'Connor as Gale Galey's cameraman.)
     But it is Dustin Hoffman, in the role of the petty thief who is the
very embodiment of the the concept anti-hero, Hoffman the discoverer of
three of the greatest physical shticks in the modern movies, who walks
off with the movie.  Hoffman, the physical actor, is non-pareil, and the
movements and gestures and expressions he has discovered to characterize
Bernie rank right up there with those of Razzo in MIDNIGHT COWBOY and as
Raymond in RAIN MAN.  In addition, Hoffman is heartbreakingly perfect
when Bernie begins to acknowledge his own deeply buried compassion and
love.  Bernie is someone who had a vision of the world so threatening,
so devastating he gave up on it and himself for years.  Bernie wants
only to be a hero to his long estranged son (who oddly seems to have no
anger about his father's long absences).  Another actor might not have
seen the complex pain in Bernie, or the underlying heroism, and it is
highly doubtful that many would have so perfectly made visible that
pain.
     I recommend HERO most highly.  Even though the movie is one too
many scenes long and despite the fact that even without his rug Chevy
Chase is out of place in this serious comedy, it is still worth even a
full admission price.

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
     Two Shakespeare plays translated to film in one year is my idea of
a good year.  I liked HENRY V despite the staginess and some of other
cavils.  Likewise, I liked HAMLET (with reservations).
     Now I know the movie (and opera) world divides pretty neatly into
those who like Franco Zeffirelli's work and those who abominate him and
it.  Likewise, the world of Shakespeare divides into purists who
sanctify the full and complete received texts and those who don't mind
having a bit a fun here and there and aren't above playing fast and
loose with the Master.
     Zeffirelli's HAMLET is no more Shakespeare's HAMLET than his ROMEO
AND JULIET or his TRAVIATA was anybody's but his own.  What I like about
his work is that he understands the difference between a play and a
movie.  His HAMLET is absolutely, positively a movie and not a filmed
play.  And movies always muck about with the source material, very much
as Shakespeare mucked about with his source material.  Even in the
titles, it doesn't say "Shakespeare's Hamlet"; it says, quite honestly,
"Based on the play by William Shakespeare."
     Zeffirelli has excised scenes, moved scenes around, relocated
scenes.  Almost every fan of Shakespeare's HAMLET will find a favorite
scene missing or altered.  There is even added material such as the
executions of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern and the death of Ophelia.
These edits seem to me to be fully justified in the name of making a
movie out of a play.
     Of course, most of us will agree that Zeffirelli has a vast and
dramatic visual sense, whether or not we can agree that he always uses
that visual sense with the best of taste.  He uses locales, sets, and
costumes with exuberance and care.  And it makes this movie, like his
others, visual feasts.  He also shoots many of his scenes en plein air,
others indoors in something like available light.  His camera is busy,
perhaps busier than is strictly necessary or desirable, but that may be
preferable to long static shots of actors declaiming (no names,
please).
     Another thing to like about Zeffirelli's HAMLET is the diction of
the actors.  They speak their parts more naturally, less hurriedly, and
swallow less of the words than is the general rule with Shakespearean
productions.
     Without a doubt, I understand HAMLET better now that I've seen
Zeffirelli's version.  I've studied it in school and seen live and
filmed versions, but I missed, not being a great Shakespearean scholar
even in my grad school days, some basic structural details that came
through loud and clear this time for the first time.  Par exemple, just
as the play-within-the-play mirrors the major action, so too does
Laertes mirror Hamlet and his situation when he lets Claudius 
manipulate him into killing Hamlet but with the telling difference that
Laertes never questions Claudius's honesty or motives and proceeds
without scruples to do his treachery.  Probably everyone else in the
civilized world knew all about this; to me it came as a revelation while
watching the final scene in the movie.
     And there are some fine actors in this movie.  I don't have the
cast list in front of me so rather than bollix the actors' names as is
my wont, let me just say that the Ghost, Polonius, Laertes, and
Guildenstern & Rosencrantz (one of whom was almost certainly a Maloney,
by the way) were all first rate; the Polonius was especially fine, in my
humble opinion, balancing comedy and an underlying seriousness with
great deftness and precision.  And the Ghost made the most of his small
role with some fine physical shtick, especially one gesture where he
covers half his face by fanning it with a kind of broken wrist movement
as he tells Hamlet he is forbidden to speak of the afterlife: a gem of
acting.
     I was almost as impressed by the acting of the "name" stars, Helena
Bonham-Carter, Glenn Close, and Mel Gibson, in descending order of
impressiveness.  Bonham-Carter brought a knowing strength to Ophelia
that I've seldom seen; her mad scene was disturbing and pathetic.  Close
looked marvelous and her scene with her son that ends with a hint of
incest was strong and moving; it had me in tears.  Gibson, a
Shakespearean dark horse if ever there were one, was surprisingly good
in most of his scenes with other actors; the art of the soliloquy,
however, has eluded him so far.  He moves well, brings a brooding energy
to his part, and did not embarrass.  There were times, though, when I
feared his eyes would pop right out of his head, which is distracting at
the least.  And I have to say that he was too old for the part, at least
as I envision Hamlet the young scholar-prince.
     Part of Gibson's trouble with the soliloquies perhaps derives from
Zeffirelli's direction.  The movie has tendency to pause and almost
clear its throat before launching into a famous speech; at times the
quotation marks were nearly visible.  I think any director has to work
very hard to overcome the Barlett's-Familiar-Quotations aspect of
HAMLET.  Too often, I felt Zeffirelli instead of downplaying this
distracting aspect was playing it up, as if he had just realized "Oh,
that's were that comes from."
     Overall, despite its shortcomings, I don't think you can regret
going to Zeffirelli's HAMLET.

Title
Review for Spotswood (1991)
     SPOTSWOOD is an Australian film directed by Mark Joffee, from a
screenplay by Max Dann and Andrew Knight and based on their novel.  It
stars Anthony Hopkins, Ben Mendelsohn, Rebecca Rigg, Toni Collette,
Alwyn Kurts, and Russell Crowe.  Rated PG for mature humor.
     SPOTSWOOD is a modest, small film with a lazy pace and one of the
most acclaimed film actors of this decade, Anthony Hopkins.  More
importantly for me, it also featured a fresh cast of characters,
especially the endearingly awkward Ben Mendelsohn and the plain and
beautifully strong Toni Collette.  This film will remind you of a number
of others, LOCAL HERO being the most obvious.  It begins like one of
those whimsical comedies of postwar Britain that celebrated eccentricity
and working-class virtues, this time with a lot of daffy people at a
moccasin factory, schlepping around in fuzzy bedroom slippers and
quilted bathrobes, a factory where the real product is a tight little
family of happy people.  Hopkins enters this fool's paradise (it is
going broke, after all) like a serpent to help the owner save the
business by destroying it, cutting out manufacturing, trimming the
staff, and introducing capitalist discipline.
     The opening sequence, as Hopkins and the audience explore the Balls
Moccasin factory for first time and get our first incredulous ganders at
its loony inmates, is very funny, very charming, and tightly paced.  And
then director Mark Joffee abruptly pulls the plug on his own momentum.
The movie continues in this uneven way to its inevitable end.
Certainly, the story holds no surprises, and the point of the film is
the characters; we do learn to care about them and to see past their
eccentricities.  We also learn to dislike one or two of them, the ones
who will never learn from this cast of industrial no-shows.  Hopkins'
character, Wallace, of course, is not amongst the short list of true and
lasting bad-uns, and we and he have a wonderful 1/24th-scale slot-car
racing sequence to thank for that.
     Hopkins is a fair treat.  He is more like the Hopkins of 84 CHARING
CROSS ROAD than either Hannibal Lecter or Henry Wilcox of HOWARDS END,
but then there's this little eye tic, this one chilly sentence, or the
briefest return of a disused smile that are texts on art of small
gestures and great acting.
     By the way, Russell Crowe was last seen in the U.S. in the
Australian film PROOF, this time playing quite a different sort of
character.  However, whereas PROOF came as close to being a perfect film
as I've seen in a long while, SPOTSWOOD is far from perfect.  It is
sweet, good natured, well intended, and entertaining; what it lacks is
sustained energy.
     I can recommend SPOTSWOOD, but not at full price.  It is receiving
a somewhat wider release than a small film from Oz would normally be
accorded thanks to the box-office power of Hopkins.

Title
Review for Mediterraneo (1991)
     MEDITERRANEO is an Italian film directed by Gabriele Salvatores,
from a script by Vincenzo Monteleone.  It stars Diego Abatantuono,
Claudio Bisio, and Giuseppa Cederna.  Unrated, includes nudity.  In
Italian, with English subtitles.
     MEDITERRANEO, which won this year's Academy Award for Best Foreign
Film, is a sweet, harmless fantasy about a group of misfits from the
Italian Army who in 1941 are supposed to occupy an obscure Greek island.
Instead, it would be fair to say that it is the island that occupies
them.  This is a retelling in some ways of the episode of the island of
the Lotus-Eaters from the Odyssey, as the script is at some pains to
remind us from time to time, even though the literary and cultural
references are largely pro forma, and certainly meaningless.
     And sitting through the movie is like a trip to lotus land for the
audience as well.  We rather cheerfully suspend reality as we begin to
savor the idyllic life the Italians find there.  The placidity, the lack
of conflict, the abundance, willingness to share, all these things seem
almost normal to us as we slip into the role of the conqueror who is
conquered.  The photography exploits the stunning scenery to the utmost.
And we are lulled by the brilliant white rock, the glowing blue water,
the inviting and dappled shade.
     As escapism goes this film is like a little vacation.  As films go,
escapism needs some work, in both the sense that it lacks focus and in
the sense of needing something to do.  It's all pretty aimless and
pointless, and whatever successes are scored in the main body of the
film, the whole affair is weakened by an epilogue that could have been
bittersweet, but instead is merely an exercise in "where are they now"
and that worst of Italian cinematic weaknesses, sentimentality.  If the
film is meant to be an anti-war film, it could use a little conflict to
show us what it is that it is against.  At least there are no small
children tugging at our heartstrings.
     Now, I do not believe there is anything inherently wrong with
beautiful scenery, lovely nude bodies of either sex, misfit soldier
comedy, or easy-going fantasy.  But I do rather find it all the more
satisfying if there is some informing intelligence behind it all, some
sense that there is point to be made, some vision of either the world
that is or the world that ought to be.  None of that obtains in
MEDITERRANEO.  
     If you liked CINEMA PARADISO or KING OF HEARTS, you will probably
like this film.  If you're curious about what it takes to the Foreign
Film Oscar, you might want to take this in, too, but you should pay
matinee prices, or wait for a cheap video.

Title
Review for Posse (1993)
     POSSE is a film directed by Mario Van Peebles and written by Sy
Richardson and Dario Scardapane.  The cast includes Mario Van Peebles,
Stephen Baldwin, Charles Lane, and Billy Zane.  Rated R for violence,
sex, and nudity.
     POSSE is an MTV film that poses as a major antidote to the
traditional lack of black people in Western movies.  The story of
blacks in the West, the black cowboys, the black homesteaders, the
black soldiers (called buffalo soldiers by the Indians), and the rest,
remains to be told.  Mario Van Peebles has taken an important, and
mostly unknown, story and trivialized it with an overproduced and
underwritten action film.
     For one thing, POSSE's writers might have bothered doing a little
research.  They misuse the word posse by making it mean "gang" instead
of "an armed band with legal authority."  They have the action begin
with the Spanish-American War (1898).  Then the story takes the
so-called posse beyond the frontier.  Piffle! In one of the landmarks
of U.S. historical study, Frederick Jackson Turner in the 1893 address
"The Significance of the Frontier in American History" established that
the frontier had died twenty years before.  Then once the posse have
gone beyond the frontier, they must take a fearsome shortcut through
Indian territory.  Never mind that Wounded Knee, the last major battle
of the Indian Wars, had taken place in 1890 and virtually all the
Indians were settled on reservations.  All this from a film that
purports to lecture its audience from time to time on the history of
blacks in the American west.
     Furthermore, I seriously question that the best vehicle for
presenting an important look at blacks in the West is an action film,
which is by its very nature a fantasy.  Someone in responding to
Bernadelli's review said that what westerns are, shoot-'em-ups.  To
which I again say, piffle.  Yes, a lot of westerns are just that, but
the best ones are not.  They may include scenes of violence, but that
is not their main thrust, their purpose, their excuse for existing.
And certainly, this film is the merest welter of a lot of other
westerns.  Van Peebles looks as much as he can like Clint Eastwood.  He
has also liberally helped himself to scenes from THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN,
UNFORGIVEN, BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, THE WILD BUNCH,
ONE-EYED JACKS, and the complete oeuvres of John Ford and Sergio
Leone.
     And then there are the narrative and style problems.  Van Peebles
has reduced an important story to a disjointed succession of violent
confrontation between a black character, usually Van Peebles, and one
of two major psychotic white villains or their many, and mostly, white
henchmen.  All this filmed with various, irrelevant "effects" such as a
brown filter that makes it look like he used film stock that was too
old.  Complications in technique and a busy sound track of mostly
inappropriate music cannot disguise, indeed only emphasize, the
unintelligent mess this movie is.
     Despite all this, I have to say I found what enjoyment there was
in some individual actors' performances.  Stephen Baldwin was
interesting as the only white member of the posse.  Billy Zane
obviously was having a lot of fun hamming it up as the psycho colonel.
It was fun seeing Melvin Van Peebles, Mario's dad.  But none of the
actors was able to rise much above the mess of the rest of the film.
     I was also interested in snippets of some silent films with black
cowboys and other western heroes.  I would like to know more about
them.
     I cannot recommend this film to anyone, but if you must go, be
sure you wait for a cheap matinee.

Title
Review for Mortal Thoughts (1991)
     MORTAL THOUGHTS is a film by Alan Rudolph, starring Demi Moore,
Glenne Headley, with Bruce Willis and Harvey Keitel, inter alios.
     MORTAL THOUGHTS is a suspense film about the death of the Willis
character, James, and told through a series of flashbacks framed by a
police interrogation of Moore.  The device works well and lets the
script slip us a few interesting surprises.
     Alan Rudolph is one of my favorite directors when he is working
with his own scripts, such as CHOOSE ME or THE MODERNS.  This film,
unfortunately, is not one of these.  It is a project he took on at the
last minute and as such is one of his second-string efforts.  To
compensate for the general lack of Rudolphian quirkiness, the film
features some glitzy photography and flashy editing.  The overall effect
is slightly fussy, I think.  But still it's a watchable effort and one
that is not totally unworthy of some qualified admiration.
     For one thing, Demi Moore is slightly wonderful as the
Italian-American working-class hairdresser in Bayonne, NJ.  MORTAL
THOUGHTS they may be, but the accent is strictly down-and-dirty Joisey.
Moore gets to do some acting for a change.  It turns out that she is not
a totally discreditable actor, if fact I was impressed by her gritty,
unpatronizing portrayal.  It redeems her role in GHOST for me.
     Glenne Headley, whose name I may or may not be spelling correctly,
plays Cynthia, James' wife and the Moore character's boss and lifelong
friend.  She brings to her part a similar egalitarian flair for Bayonne
and the added fillip of getting to portray a woman not that stable to
start and who descends into a kind of madness by the end.  It's a well
modulated performance and one which I greatly enjoyed.
     Willis gets to play James, the totally irredeemable druggie,
abusive husband, layabout, and general scumbag.  And Rudolph, to his
enormous credit, got Willis to play this unattractive role without a
glint of that horrible Willisian cuteness and charm.  It maybe that
Willis, too, is, under it all, an actor.
     Harvey Keitel is the cop who conducts most of the interview and is
wonderful as always.  The other character actors were also attractive
and effective in their roles.  Indeed, this is a movie for acting buffs,
more than story buffs, perhaps.  I was interested but not compelled,
alert but not alarmed, through the unfolding of the story.
     I can recommend MORTAL THOUGHTS to anyone who can get to a cheap
matinee.  I hope Rudolph made enough off this movie so that he do one of
his own next.

Title
Review for Henry & June (1990)
     This is the first NC17 movie, a fact which will no doubt put you in
good stead in some future trivia game.  The movie is considered too much
for kids, but too good not to be rated and given entree to the world's
multiplexes.
     The most "unconventional" thing about HENRY & JUNE is the lavish
scenes of sex between women.  As a gay man, I have to say that I grew a
trifle restive at so much of it, even if the photography was uniformly
excellent and the actors attractive and interesting people.  All I'm
saying is that the sex, the eroticism is not, for me, the reason to see
HENRY & JUNE.
     Acting, script, character development -- these are the reasons to
see HENRY & JUNE.  The three principals -- Fred Ward as Henry Miller,
Uma Thurman (DANGEROUS LIAISONS) as his wife June, and Maria de Madeiros
as Anais Nin -- give magnificently complex performances.  Of the three,
Madeiros is the most attractive, but Thurman is the most interesting.
June is in many ways the focus of the film since both Miller and Nin not
only sleep with her (as well as each other) but write books about her.
     Nin is the narrative focus of the film, which is about, inter alia,
her relationships with the title characters; she is in every scene; she
is the narrator; it is through her eyes and her diaries that we see the
world.  And Madeiros is wonderfully right.  She looks like Nin, small,
strong, huge-eyed, unblinking, all-seeing, very private, very open.
     Fred Ward's Miller is less successful only by comparison.  Miller
is portrayed very much as a traditional man, blind to who the women in
his life were except insofar as they were extensions of himself.  As a
man, he is limited in what he can see, feel, or think.  These things, I
think, are how Nin sees him, regardless of how he was.
     But always I come back to Thurman's June: whore, muse, patrona,
con-woman, strong, intensely afraid of death.  Obsessed with finding a
great writer who could portray her as she felt she was; always
disappointed, angry, loving, ungrateful, impossible, manipulating,
independent, clinging.  It is as complete a a portrait of a human being
as I have ever seen on film and a stunning achievement for the actor.

Title
Review for Let Him Have It (1991)
     LET HIM HAVE IT is a movie directed by Peter Medak and written by
Neal Purvis and Robert Wade.  It stars Chris Eccleston, Paul Reynolds,
Tom Courtenay, Eileen Atkins, Clare Holman, and Tom Bell.  Rated R --
due to violence and strong language.
     LET HIM HAVE IT presents a true story of the notorious
Craig-Bentley murder trial in Great Britain of 1952.  It is a gripping,
engrossing attack on miscarried justice and the death penalty.  Peter
Medak previously directed THE KRAYS, another true story set in the drab
Fifties, the endless row houses, and illuminated by the movies-driven
gangster obsessions.  But in terms of style and technique LET HIM HAVE
IT goes off in quite a different direction.  It is less showy, more
naturalistic, more a character study than a case study.
     The case has apparently been a controversial story in Britain for
four decades.  There have been, I understand, a West End play, a shelf
of books, several TV documentaries, a song by Elvis Costello, and a
petition drive to clear Derek Bentley's name.  The Home Office recently
decided to reopen the file.
     At issue is whether Bentley should have been hanged for the murder
of a police officer during a bungled break-in.  Bentley's pal Chris
Craig pulled the trigger and Bentley was already under technical arrest
at the time.  But Bentley was 19 and could be hanged, whereas Craig was
16 and too young to die; instead, he served 10 years in prison.  Adding
to the controversy was the fact that Bentley had a very limited
intelligence, rated no more than an 11-year-old's.
     It was Bentley's words "Let him have it, Chris" when the police
officer demanded Craig's gun that hanged him.  The prosecution said it
meant "Open fire" and the defense said it meant "Surrender the gun."
Craig let him have it and wounded that officer and twenty minutes later
shot another in the head.
     Medak builds a case that leaves no doubt in the viewer's mind that
Bentley should never have been tried, much less executed.  He follows
Bentley's life episodically from the time he as a child was buried alive
in building rubble during the bombing of London, an experience Medak
implies left Bentley with epilepsy or other brain damage or both.  He
builds up a sympathetic portrait of a young man who needed help more
than hanging.
     One of the glories of this film is its superb ensemble cast.  Chris
Eccleston and Paul Reynolds could not have been better as Bentley and
Craig, respectively; Eccleston commands the screen in an extraordinary
way for a newcomer, and Reynolds with his weird, sardonic, leary grin
and trickster energy is impressive as the angry, playful baby-gangster.
The elder Bentleys are played by Tom Courtenay and Eileen Atkins in
memorable, moving portrayals of loving people struggling against
currents totally out of their depths.  These four are supported by rich
performances from veterans of the Swinging London era of the Sixties --
Clive Revill, Murray Melvin, Michael Gough, Ronald Fraser, and Tom Bell.
Clare Holman as Bentley's sister is warm, caring, protective.
     In addition, Medak, his cinematographer Oliver Stapleton, and the
rest recreate violence-weary post-War Britain with amazing completeness
and conviction.
     The script by Neal Purvis and Robert Wade concentrates more on the
personal story of the Bentley family than on the sociology, psychology,
jurisprudence, or politics of the case.  We have wonderful portraits,
but we are left wondering why Bentley was hanged.  Were the police
determined to have a blood sacrifice to expiate the death of the
officer?  Did the Home Secretary connive at Bentley's death?  Did the
judge intervene unfairly in his summation to the jury?  Maybe these are
the questions that cannot be answered.  So we come away vastly moved,
saddened, repulsed by justice too swift and too final, deeply impressed
by a powerful film and a strange story.
     I hope you get a chance to see LET HIM HAVE IT.  In the Seattle
area it is playing at the Metro Cinema.  I recommend it at any price.
And if anyone in the U.K.  wants to write me about how the film was
received there, I'd appreciate it.

Title
Review for Prince of Tides, The (1991)
     THE PRINCE OF TIDES is a film directed by Barbra Streisand, based
on a novel by Pat Conroy.  It stars Nick Nolte, Streisand, Blythe
Danner, Kate Nelligan, and Jason Gould.  Rated R for violence and sexual
situations.
     THE PRINCE OF TIDES is the fourth Pat Conroy novel to be translated
into film: CONRACK (1974), THE GREAT SANTINI (1979), and THE LORDS OF
DISCIPLINE (1983).  None of the previous efforts have satisfied Conroy's
fans for various reasons.  News that La Streisand had acquired rights to
the novel for her latest vehicle was probably not greeted with universal
rejoicing.  Streisand's efforts at auteur have resulted in stylized
histrionics and overweening ego in the past.
     Much to my relief and surprise, Streisand has created a good movie,
maybe not a great movie, but one that is eminently watchable.  She steps
back and lets Nick Nolte carry the film, although it is true that she
has made her role as New York psychiatrist Susan Lowenstein more
prominent than it is in the novel.
     Pat Conroy co-wrote the screenplay with Becky Johnson,
concentrating on the New York love story.  They cut out the adult
character of Luke, the Prince of Tides himself, who now appears only as
a juvenile in flashbacks.  They cut the complicated Southern past in
general as well as the poetic sense of place of the Carolina tidelands.
The characters of the women are also downplayed, the mother Lila (Kate
Nelligan) and the wife (Blythe Danner).
     Instead, what we get is a skillful and engrossing series of
flashbacks, a passionate love story, a couple of shocks, a wonderful
bitch fight between Nolte's Tom Wingo and Jeroen Krabbe as Lowenstein's
horrible, world-famous-violinist husband.  We also get a chance to see
Jason Gould, the son of Streisand and Elliot Gould; Jason turns out to
be a very likeable performer, btw.
     And most of all, we get an very touching performance by Nolte as
Tom, the self-protecting, deeply troubled husband/son/brother.  The
movie is mostly about his unfolding from his foetal crouch, his
blossoming into full humanity.  Nolte never looked handsomer and his
acting is detailed, sensitive, fearless, subtle, and moving.
     It would be easy to dismiss PRINCE OF TIDES as another installment
in the cycle of yuppie redemption flicks, or a pop-psych feel-good
psychobabbler.  I say if you give Streisand half a chance, if you can
forget about YENTL and NUTS, you will be rewarded with a thoroughly
satisfying entertainment, even at full ticket price.

Title
Review for Meeting Venus (1991)
     MEETING VENUS is a film directed by Istvan Szabo, produced by David
Puttnam, and written by Szabo and Michael Hirst.  The film stars Glenn
Close and Niels Arestrup.  Rated PG-13 for sexual themes.
     MEETING VENUS is a witty film about grand opera, in this case the
mounting of a new production of TANNHAUSER in Paris for a live and a
television audience.  The director is the Hungarian Zoltan Szendo,
played by Niels Arestrup, who is getting his first big break in the
West.  The political dimensions of opera have never been thrown into a
clearer light as Szendo not only has to contend with unions and
"democracy," but also the lingering effects of World War II, the Spanish
Civil War, and the Cold War on the attitudes of the singers, musicians,
administrators, and everyone else involved in any way, however
tangentially, with producing TANNHAUSER.
     Szendo wants to talk about the passion of the music.  Everyone
around him wants him to sign petitions, cancel rehearsals, take sides in
the internal politics of l'Opera Europa, the fictive production company.
Then, on top of all his other frustrations, the great diva Karin
Andersson, played by Glenn Close of all people, sails into rehearsal one
morning a week late and promptly snubs him.  Miraculously (in a literal
way) and inevitably, TANNHAUSER does get produced and the movie ends
with a smashing, greatly moving, and unrehearsed version, but the road
to that point is what makes MEETING VENUS so satisfying and so much fun.
     The script has a certainly inevitability to it, but Szabo and Hirst
do fill the script with any fine smaller moments, such as the improvised
duet between Szendo and Andersson about "cheesy Swiss" and all the other
national antagonisms of united Europe.
     Arestrup, a newcomer, as far as I know, is a wonderful screen
presence.  His appearance is not conventionally handsome, but he
projects so much energy and concentration that he is quite overwhelming.
His interpretation of Szendo is perfect and intense as the artist
clinging to the one steady rock, Wagner's music, in this new and
confusing world of private enterprise, private art, and the chaotic,
messy politics of democracy, all of which appear to care not one whit
about the music for which he is prepared to sacrifice anything.  When he
finally asserts himself, it is to assert the primacy of the music above
all else, and it is an exciting and dramatic moment.  Arestrup was
capable of keeping up with Close, who, although not a scene-stealer, is
such a powerful presence herself as to be always the focus of any scene
she's in.
     Glenn Close is, of course, wonderful.  I'm aware that Close has her
fans and her detractors, inexplicable as the latter is to me.  I think
she is one of the two best screen actresses of her generation in
American films today -- the other being Meryl Streep (I think they're
rough contemporaries).  She is mercurial -- one moment, the imperious
diva passing out air kisses like dukedoms, the next moment, the lover
slick with the sweat of love-making and her anger, one moment obsequious
and mocking at the same time, the next radiant and exultant.  The only
thing that keeps her from being a perfect diva is her physical size
which -- despite her relatively high lip-synching skills -- prevent us
from ever fully accepting the power of Kiri Te Kanawa's voice emanating
from that thin, tiny body.
     The other cast members constitute a charming ensemble miscellany of
delightful character actors: the little dumpy man from Dresden who
matches a glorious voice with the meanest of small minds, the passionate
and hefty singers as much in love with pasta as with each other or
Wagner, the seductive younger singers who want to cuddle up with a new
genius, the politicking and adversarial bureaucrats.  The only cavils I
have here are that the lip-synching skills of some of the singing roles
were not as strong as they ought to have been and that (once again) I
have to protest the exclusively flaky homosexuals.
     No one in opera, the move seems to say, is what we the audience
would call normal, but the gay men in the opera world are abnormal even
by opera's standards.  There's the production designer who dresses and
looks like the leather queen of Elm Street and whose reaction to stress
is decidedly off the wall; there's the American singer who is big, tall,
butch, and ineffectual; there's the choreographer who is simply a bitch.
I'm not buying and Szabo shouldn't be selling it: not every queer in
show biz is out of his mind.
     Szabo has got to be one of the great directors of world cinema.
His Mephisto trilogy (MEPHISTO'S WALTZ, COLONEL REDL, and to a less
extent HANUSSMAN) ought to settle that for some time to come.  By
contrast with MEPHISTO, MEETING VENUS is a much lighter-weight
entertainment.  This latest Szabo film is very funny all the way
through.  It has some serious things to say about democracy and about
art and love and making choices (and the freedom to make those choices).
However, the comedy and romance are so delightful, and the glorious
music so completely charming, that I leave the theater feeling uplifted
and relaxed MEPHISTO or REDL never would have let me.
     I don't know if you will get a chance to see MEETING VENUS in your
area, but if you can I recommend that you do so and not worry about the
ticket price.  This movie is is worth.
     One note: if necessary, you might want to bone up on Wagner's
TANNHAUSER a little.  It will add to your enjoyment and understanding of
the movie.

Title
Review for Proof (1991)
     PROOF is a film written and directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse.  It
stars Hugo Weaving, Genevieve Picot, Russell Crowe.  Australian.  Rated
R for brief nudity, mature themes.
     PROOF is the first feature film by the 31-year-old Australian
writer-director Jocelyn Moorhouse.  It is perfect.  She has given us
something very special -- a completely original film directed with
precision and insight.
     The story asks the question "Why would a blind person take
photographs?"  The answer is rife with dramatic possibilities and
compelling implications about human nature, about truth, about trust.
     Partial plot summary follows.  Possible spoilers, but owing to the
limited circulation of this excellent film in the U.S., I feel justified
to discuss the plot in a limited way:
     The blind person is Martin, played by Hugo Weaving, who cannot
trust anything or anyone.  His photos are his way of providing proof
that the world he perceives is the same as the one of the sighted.  In
the absence of vision, he seeks absolute truth, but trusts no one to
describe his photos to him until he meets Andy, played by Russell Crowe,
who has the time and ability to describe Martin's photos in 10 words or
less.  Andy's arrival threatens Martin's housekeeper, Celia, played by
Genevieve Picot, who is locked in a closed-loop relationship with Martin
that is cruel, sadistic, cynical, and mutual.
     Andy is the catalyst that breaks everyone out of the loop.  Martin
must learn to trust someone who he knows has lied to him once; he must
accept the fact that "everyone lies."  Andy has to pull himself out of
his wandering, aimless, purposeless life.  Celia must walk away from the
life she's lived for the last three-and-a-half years; she and Martin
must change their lives from models of mutual, destructive dependence to
a new, more painful independence.  These are the small epiphanies of
real people moving through their lives.
     Moorhouse's film is small and concentrated on people who are
interesting without being impossible.  She concentrates on her story and
on her actors, who excellent.  She does this without bravado or
pretension and with no false steps.
     PROOF is, nevertheless, a visual success, neatly composed, shot in
natural light, sharply edited, with much of the story coming through
visually.  The story is also funny, surprising, even shocking in a quiet
way.  Moorhouse uses her sound editor to mix natural sounds and a sound
track by the Australian group Waving, Not Drowning to enhance a
non-visual realm of the senses.
     I recommend PROOF to you in the strongest possible terms.  Look for
it, ask for it.  It may be the best film you see this year.

Title
Review for One Hundred and One Dalmatians (1961)
     Walt Disney took a new turn in full-length animated films when he
released 101 DALMATIANS in 1961.  Until that time, gothic fairy tales
were the norm for this genre.  When Walt nearly sank the studio in 1958
with the disastrous release of SLEEPING BEAUTY, he turned to different
material, a different style, and a different feel.  Some of the results
were pretty forgettable, but the first, 101 DALMATIANS, was fresh and
clever, an original, a novelty.
     The film has gone into a national re-issue for the first time since
1985, and for me it is still a beautifully drawn, charming, and
entertaining film.  The story is narrated by a male Dalmatian dog (you
know, the firehouse dog, the white short-hair with the black spots), who
first plots to mate his human "pet" and then has to save his and his
mate's puppies from the wonderfully off-the-wall villainous Cruela de
Vil.  The story is set in London and the English countryside; the
accents are English except for the two songs Pongo's human sings, which
is odd, but the songs are short.  This is not a musical, but the Pongo's
human is a professional songwriter.
     The story is one that ought to amuse adults, except perhaps for
those of the most severe sort.  It offers satirical notes of a
surprisingly sophisticated level.  However, children seem to have
changed in thirty years, what with the restricted attention spans and an
unrelenting diet of mayhem and violence, so that much of the
under-twelve element in my audience was pretty bored by the film, except
for the chase sequence that dominates the last third of the movie; even
there, the children stopped fussing and chatting only during the most
explosive or pratfall-filled parts.
     Two story elements broke a long Disney tradition.  No one's mother
dies.  And the villain does not have a villainous cat.  In fact, the
only cat in this doggy movie was Sargeant, who is instrumental in saving
99 Dalmatian puppies from Cruela's cockney henchmen.
     The art style is a kind of loosely constructed watercolor that I
associate with the late Fifties and early Sixties, and which I, as a
former denizen of that era, find very attractive.  The backgrounds are
rather luscious and detailed, but in a way a world away from the great
1930s animations like SNOW WHITE.
     The movements are smooth and natural.  In fact, so skill were the
Disney animators in capturing gesture and movement, that body language
tells part of the story, even as it does in live-action films.
     Cruela is, of course, a lot of fun, a kind of satire of the
wicked-stepmother prototype so basic to Disney and to fairy tales.  The
outward signs of her interior evil are probably more obvious and more in
line with general thinking than they were 30 years ago.  She smokes
cigarettes, polluting the air with a bilious miasma of smoke, and
scattering her ashes and butts with a vicious abandon.  She wears huge
fur coats; she loves fur and hates animals.  She drives a gas hog that
could easily be the origin of the bumper sticker "As a matter of fact, I
do own the road."  (Cruela's voice was supplied by Betty Lou Gerson, who
sounds like Tallulah Bankhead on speed.)
     Television comes in for a certain amount of satire, too.  One
charming sequence has Pongo, his mate, and their pups watching a Rin Tin
Lassie shoot-em-up; the pups are great in their reactions and their
engrossment in the TV.  Later the cockneys Horace and Jasper are so
wrapped up in a game show called "What's My Crime" that they make a
major mistake.  There is also a scene of the pups watching an old
cartoon with dancing flowers; I've seen that cartoon, it's real, and I
wonder how the Disney people got it to play on their cartoon TV in that
pre-computer era; it really looks like the original.  (There's also a
moment of a car plowing through heavy that looks like a innovation in
animation for the time; maybe someone can fill me in what it was I saw
-- it was not conventional cel animation.)
     The film is short, under ninety minutes, as were most of the
animated films, but may be too long for most young children.  I'd say
it's about the right length for adults and mature children.
     I can recommend 101 DALMATIANS, but I'd look for a cheap matinee
and I'd prepare to be tolerant about audience noise.

Title
Review for NeverEnding Story II: The Next Chapter, The (1990)
     THE NEVERENDING STORY II is a sequel to the 1985 fantasy based on
part of a children's book by Michael Ende that was very popular in
Europe, but largely unknown in the U.S.  This new installment picks up
the story pretty much where the old one left off.  And although this new
movie is different from the earlier, it is an open question whether it
is better or worse.
     For the record, I was disappointed in the first NEVERENDING STORY.
I didn't like the obvious allegory of the story, neither did I think
the special effects came up to contemporary standards.  I did rather
like the boy actor who played the central role of hero and I liked the
way the story played with the ways the reader enters into and changes
the story he or she is reading, an idea also exploited to some extent by
THE PRINCESS BRIDE.
     In NEVERENDING II, I am still bothered by the allegory, but while
the special effects are pretty obvious they are more interesting and the
sets, costumes, decor, and mattes are pretty wonderful.  However, I find
I do not much like the new boy actor, whose name I do not have in front
of me.  He is not a natural actor, but is very visibly "reacting" and
"registering".  Some of the other characters/actors seem more capable,
especially the large bird character that does a lot of fun things with
avian body language.  I also liked the evil witch/queen/stepmother
archetype and her servant Three Faces (?), he of the multiple faces and
purposes.  We meet some familiar characters from the earlier movie,
including Atreyu, the plains-Indian warrior-boy, Rock Biter (along with
a really charming infant son), and that elongated, flying Pekinese whose
name also escapes me.
     The movie is too much interested in making a point and not enough
in telling a story.  The fantasy exists simply as a frame for the moral,
rather than having any moral derive from the fantasy.  Its moral purpose
is heavy-handed and mercilessly driven home in almost every scene.  When
I think of the most perfect movie of this type, THE WIZARD OF OZ, and
compare it to THE NEVERENDING STORY II, I am grateful that the latter is
not a musical.
     Despite this, adults can take children to this movie in confidence
that neither will be neither embarrassed or bored out of their gourds.
And adults can go by themselves, as Lyndol and I did, and have a
reasonably good time, especially at a cheap matinee on a rainy Saturday.

Title
Review for Memoirs of an Invisible Man (1992)
     MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is a film directed by John Carpenter.
The script was written by Robert Collector, Dana Olsen, and William
Goldman, based on a novel by H.F.  Saint.   It stars Chevy Chase, Darryl
Hannah, Sam Neil.  Rated PG-13, for mature humor, mild profanity.
     MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is an agreeable, likeable, barely-there
piece of special-effects fluff.  It's entertaining but it leaves you
wanting to see a real movie, with some substance.
     Certainly, this is Chevy Chase's most engaging and energetic
performance in years, although it cannot compare with the screwball
comedy-mystery he made with Goldie Hawn in the Seventies, except that
both films are set in San Francisco.  And we get to see him briefly nude
twice, which is a pretty high ratio of occurrence for a film in which we
can't see him at all half the time.  Chevy's character could have been
quite interesting: he's a non-ambitious yuppie, a coaster who makes
money despite himself, a b.s. artist, whose comfortable apoliticalness
should be more challenged by his predicament.
     The thing about this Invisible Man movie that is supposed to make
it interesting is its depiction what it would really be like, what would
be the unexpected disadvantages.  Except as a vehicle for the Industrial
Light and Magic magic and for the extended chase that makes up most of
the movie, this psychological (and physical) dynamic is given a pretty
short shrift.
     Sam Neil, as the heavy, gets to turn in a likeably vile
performance.  Ever since the Garden of Eden, the bad guy's been stealing
the show and MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is no exception.  Of course,
his viciousness and duplicity and ruthlessness are completely
unexplained as character traits.  There are just givens, that is, he's a
spook and that's all we need to know to understand him.  Too bad.
     Carpenter, who was hired on the strength of his STARMAN, does some
wonderful intercutting of Chevy visible and invisible to the audience.
The effects are pretty good, but frankly they are not convincing, that
is, they never fail to look like effects.  Indeed some of them are
amateurishly clumsy, such as the gun held to Neil's head and a headless
Chevy running through a park.  The best is the bubble gum bit and that's
about two minutes into the movie.  Chevy's voice-over hints at a darker
vision, probably inherited from the novel, but Carpenter lets it slide
every time.  Goldman's (et al.)  dialog is consistently intelligent, but
the ending is abrupt and screams sequelitis.
     I might be moved to recommend MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN to you at
matinee prices, but really it all so pointless, isn't it?

Title
Review for Dave (1993)
     DAVE is a film directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Gary Ross.
The cast includes Kevin Kline, Sigourney Weaver, Ben Kingsley, Frank
Langella, Charles Grodin, and Ving Rhames.  Rated PG-13 for language
and sexual situations.
     Trivial first things first: Kevin Kline does a nude scene;
Sigourney Weaver does not.  And a cute one it is.  Secondly, some of
you are going to be having a lot of fun spotting the many "as himself
or herself" cameos by political and media celebrities.  There's a
pretty good list of them in the closing credits and when you go back
for a second or third viewing, you'll get another chance to add to your
Life Life.
     And the chances are you will be going back.  DAVE is a very
watchable movie with a heart of gold, a popular and needed message, a
gentle, affirming satire, and many engaging, even endearing
performances.
     There is Frank Langella as the corrupt and corrupting presidential
chief of staff.  Langella has developed the art of the villain to a
fine point.  Charles Grodin makes this his best performance in years as
Dave's slightly bug-eyed, slightly long-suffering pushover pal and
small businessman.  Ben Kingsley is perhaps a shade too noble, a touch
too wooden as the incorruptible vice-president.  Ving Rhames as the
head of the presidential security detail slowly unbends and opens up,
turning into a really lovable guy who turns in a one-line, slightly
oblique declaration of male friendship that in the context is rather
sweet; otherwise, his is a nicely paced comic performance that depends
on minimalist gestures and looks and is admirably, but subtly
masterful.
     Sigourney Weaver plays the First Lady, alienated from her husband
for good reasons but hanging in there to do some good for her favorite
cause.  Weaver proves that she can be strong and likable and still
have a very expensive haircut.
     And finally, of the actors, we come to Kevin Kline, whose
versatility and presence I've admired since A FISH CALLED WANDA (even
though he was in several earlier films, I failed to pick up on him
until then).  Kline brings so much energy and enthusiasm and charm to
his role of the ultimate impersonator.  A question the film asks in its
non-preaching way is who is greater impersonator, Dave or the President
he steps in for.  Kline is a perfectionist, a detail-oriented actor.
In this dual role he has to look like two different men who just happen
to have identical features.  The way their different personalities
inform and shape those features makes them recognizable to us and a
kind of challenge that might be a nightmare for another actor.
     The film benefits not only from having a first-rate cast but also
Ivan Reitman as director and Gary Ross as writer.  Reitman, who has
directed GHOSTBUSTERS and TWINS, is at his best in his particular style
of breezy gags, convincing production values, and a common-person's
moral center.  This is a worthy successor to the Capra tradition, a
kind of KEVIN KLINE GOES TO WASHINGTON.  Its vision and its ideals are
simple and, I fear, simplistic, but they add up to a heart-warming
fantasy about honesty and common-sense fixing the complex problems of
the day.  Maybe not, after all it's been a while since we tried honesty
and commonsense.  And along the way Ross has given us a lot of very
funny gags, a story that offers surprises and few holes, and lots and
lots of laughs.

Title
Review for Impromptu (1991)
     IMPROMPTU is a film staring Judy Davis.  It is itself an impromptu
on the beginning of the famous liaison of George Sand, the French
novelist, and Frederick Chopin, the Polish composer and pianist.  If you
find those attributions necessary, you may not feel drawn initially to
IMPROMPTU because you have not been infected yet with these fascinating
personalities and artists.  If you find the attributions irritating and
inadequate, you are the primary audience for this film.  However, I urge
people of the first category to see IMPROMPTU, too; it is a wonderful
film, funny, alive, visually and musically rich, driven by complex
performances by some really wonderful actors.
     George Sand is played by Judy Davis, an actor I am not familiar
with, but one I want to see again soon.  Sand was a woman who achieved
notoriety in her day by adopting a male nom de plume, wearing men's
clothes, smoking cigars, being a sportswoman, conducting her love
affairs openly, and being her own person; she was a kind of one-woman
cause celebre in 1830s and 1840s.  In IMPROMPTU Sand invites herself
to a country house party to meet and seduce Chopin, for whom she has
developed an obsession on the strength of his music.  The socially
ambitious duchess has invited him, his great friend Franz Liszt (played
by Julian Sands), Liszt's lover (Bernadette Peters), Eugene Delacroix,
the painter, and Edward de Muset, the poet and Sands' great (but now
former) love, invited them for a fortnight in the country.
     I believe this wonderful set-up is the invention of the screen
writer.  (You will note the lack of many names in this notice--my source
material was destroyed before I could write this and I have a
Emmenthalerisch memory (full of holes).)  The house party is hilariously
disastrous, Sand's wild children contributing not a little to the final
catastrophe.
     Back in Paris, Sand continues her pursuit of Chopin, who is
depicted here as prim to the point of prissiness.  Meanwhile another
claimant has entered the lists for the reluctant Pole.  And Sand is
having problems with a past that continues to make claims on her,
ludicrously and ridiculously.  Through all this bedroom-farcical comedy
runs a serious and tender love story that is finding itself as the movie
unfolds.
     And through it all, Davis is preposterous, impossible, tender,
desperate, strong, weak, cunning, naive, awkward, and graceful, full of
guile and honesty, till she near to breaks your heart with a performance
that nearly turns IMPROMPTU into a one-woman show.
     Fortunately, for the viewer who believes that two great
performances are better than one, Peters is more than up to the
challenge of holding her own on screen.  For once, Peters gets a chance
to *act* and in a major part.  Her character, a titled lady who left her
husband to be Liszt's muse (and winds up being the mother of his
enormous flock of infants, whose crying he escapes by his continuous
touring and concertizing), is turned from being a light, sophisticated 
Parisienne into a shrew and harpy by the unhappiness and unfairness of
her life as a "conventional" mistress and upper-class bohemian, her
life as a woman who has children, stays home, and whose role is to
"inspire" her man to greatness.  In the end, it ruins her, but allows
Peters to register the most mature performance that I have ever seen 
from her.
     But then this is a great ensemble cast with wonderful, memorable
performances from every single member.  The cast is mostly English and
the Frenchness of the script is perhaps a little thin.  The country
nobleman who unwillingly hosts his wife's artists is an English squire
of the old school, interested in hunting, not art; perhaps such types
are also French.  I don't know.  But this is a very English film, IMHO,
for all the French locales and names.  The squire-type even says "Bon
appetit" with an English accent.  I was also slightly distracted by the
resemblance between the handsome young man who plays Chopin and the
Chekhov-character from the original Star Trek days, the smile, the
physical business, the East Slavic accent, quite striking, actually;
fortunately this Chopin is a better actor by far than the scene-chewing,
"wodka" drinking Mr. Chekhov.
     These minuscule cavils aside, I cheerfully recommend IMPROMPTU to
you.  It is a first-rate movie rich in performances.

Title
Review for Wide Sargasso Sea (1993)
     WIDE SARGASSO SEA is a film directed by John Duigan.  The case
includes Karina Lombard, Nathaniel Parker, Rachel Ward, and Michael
York.  Music is by Stewart Copeland.  Rated NC-17, for (frontal) nudity
and sexual situations.
     John Duigan is a great Australian director who has made his
reputation with small, personal films including FLIRTING and THE YEAR
MY VOICE BROKE.  In adapting Jean Rhys' 1966 novel to the screen,
Duigan has eschewed the small, the personal, the Australian and given
us a slight and slightly dull Gothic romance.  He turns the beauty of
Jamaica into a moody, dangerous haunt and peoples it with ciphers whose
actions we cannot begin to understand, unless we ourselves just happen
to be characters in a bodice-ripper.  Rhys was bold enough to take the
moody hero of JANE EYRE, Edward Rochester (played by Nathaniel Parker),
and attempt to explain why he was the way he was to poor dear Jane.
Probably not that good of an idea to be begin with.  And Duigan cannot
help but make more of a muddle of the thing.
     Rochester's first wife, mad and locked away in the attic, turns
out to have been Antoinette Cosway, the creole daughter of an English
planter and ex-slave-holder and his French wife.  One nice thing about
Antoinette's story is that we get to see Michael York and Rachel Ward
in brief parts as the parents.  Antoinette, played by newcomer Karina
Lombard, is eventually married off to the penniless second son of a
wealthy English family.  After some initial difficulties, they settle
into one of her family houses tucked up in the mountains and enjoy what
is supposed to uninhibited lovemaking.  As these things go it isn't
much and probably the only reason the film got its NC-17, which Duigan
reputedly set out to get, is a lamentably short shot of Parker's
penis.
     Both of the principals are handsome people and look marvelous in
the nude.  Duigan hasn't given them a lot to do in or out of their
clothes.  And most of their actions are pretty hard to fathom.  He gets
a poison-pen letter that his wife has the seeds of insanity in her and
suddenly he no longer loves her.  *And* she starts to lose it.
     Lombard is no great shakes as an actor and that doesn't help us
any to understand her character.  Parker's acting is better, but
meaningless and unmotivated.  Some of the black supporting actors are
actually interesting performers especially the woman who plays a
combination witch and nanny and another woman who plays one of the
servants with a combination of coldness and pity and secret jokes that
is quite appealing.
     I cannot recommend WIDE SARGASSO SEA to anyone at any price,
except die-hard Duigan fans, perhaps.

Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast (1991)
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is a Walt Disney animated musical film.  The
directors are Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise.  The voices are provided by
Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Angela Lansbury, Robert White, Jerry
Ohrbach, and David Ogden Stiers.  The songs were written by the late
Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, the same team responsible for THE LITTLE
MERMAID and THE LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS.  Rated G - General audiences.
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ranks with the best that Disney ever produced,
either before or after Walt's death.  It is, I'm sure, better than
MERMAID, despite similarities and parallels.  For one thing, Belle
(voice by Paige O'Hara) is a more interesting character than Ariel.
Belle's goal in life to get out of her stifling provincial village, not
to get married; indeed, the only marriage prospect in sight is so
unacceptable as to rule out the possibility altogether.  That suitor is
Gaston (voice of Robert White) is the hilariously conceited village
macho man, who thinks Belle's beloved books are fit only to cushion his
muddy hunting boots.  Belle is independent, bookish, the perfect
personality to learn to see past the cover of the Beast's book, as it
were.
     The voice of the Beast is done by Robby Benson, of all people, who
can roar, inject great humor into the beastly mutterings, and be tender,
hurt, and loving.  Other voice characters include Mrs.  Potts (Angela
Lansbury), a living teapot and as cozy, nurturing a teapot as ever
poured itself; Lansbury, by the way, sings the title song, sounding
rather like a cross between the cook in "Upstairs, Downstairs" and the
estimable Verna Felton, the voice of the fairy godmother in CINDERELLA.
Jerry Ohrbach did the voice of Lumiere, the candelabra (natch), and
David Odgen Stiers the clock, Cogsworth.  At first blush, one might
think, as I did watching trailers for this film earlier this fall, 
anthropomorphized bric-a-brac was more than a little too cute.  But
instead, I was charmed by them and amazed at how thoroughly personalized
they were.
     In fact, looking at the above voice cast, one is struck by the
quality overall.  The Broadway musical is alive and well in the cartoon
and this is a dream cast that no producer could pay enough to appear
live on stage for a year.  The music is excellent and quite different
from the score of MERMAID.  Only one big production number, no ethnic
overtones.  Instead, operetta-like songs and numbers, including a
classic curtain raiser that gets a lot of characters singing together
and antiphonally.  The influence of Andrew Lloyd Webber is there to some
degree and they add to the development of the characters.
     The script is funny, exciting, resonant, and entertaining to the
kids and the adults.  The animation is very imaginative and detailed.
The Beast's castle is a masterpiece of Gothic brooding.  The animators
used a multiplane camera and some rather flashy computer animation,
especially in the ballroom scene that seemed to approach photorealism at
moments.  The story opens with a prologue told by a voice-overs and
stained-glass-like illustrations, a motif we return to at the end.  The
story-telling is clear, precise and uses state-of-the-art techniques to
advance the story.

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
     BATMAN RETURNS is a film directed by Tim Burton, from a screenplay
by Daniel Waters.  It stars Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny
DeVito, Christopher Walken, Michael Gogh, Pat Hingle, and Michael
Murphy.  Music by Danny Elfman.  Production designed by Bo Welsh.  Rated
PG-13, for violence and sexual innuendo.
     BATMAN RETURNS, I hardly need say, is the sequel to the 1989
benchmark film BATMAN.  I had thought that I would not bother adding
another review to the tsunami of critical and other reactions to what
must be the film event of the Summer of '92, and then I went to see it.
I think my reactions are different enough from the ones I've seen so far
to justify yet another review.  In sum, I loved it unstintingly, I
grinned like a maniac from beginning to end in a way I haven't since I
stopped dropping acid in the early '70s, I grinned until my face ached.
I laughed out loud.  I cheered, especially Catwoman.  I was dazzled by
the design and the cinematography.  I had a wonderful time.
     This is not to say the film could not have been better, that it
didn't have its problems, its deficiencies, but what we have is so good,
so much fun, that I really couldn't have stood it to be better.  Thanks
heavens for things like Tim Burton's well-known disregard for plot, for
Daniel Waters' crudeness, for models that looked like models, and for
Danny DeVito's makeup and costume which weigh him down like an anchor.
     Tim Burton may well be the perfect director for our MTV-soaked
sensibilities in that he is so overwhelmingly a visual artist that he
cheerfully sacrifices all other artistic considerations to the Look.
When I criticized EDWARD SCISSORHANDS in this forum for plot holes that
would have swallowed a Mack truck, people eagerly informed it was a
fairy tale and so little considerations like logic and continuity need
not apply (but where did he get that damned ice?).  I still consider ES
to be his weakest effort to date, just as I still think BEETLEJUICE is
the best of the four Burton movies I have seen.  Here in BATMAN RETURNS
the Look is everything.  "I don't know about you, Miss Kitty, but I feel
purr-fectly yummy," Catwoman says the first time she dons her new
costume; she is her outfit; in her civvies she is quite a different
person.  Bruce Wayne could never do the things Batman does; he's wearing
the wrong clothes.  Oswald Coddlepot wears Dickensian drag; Penguin rips
away human clothes with his humanity, such as it is.  Gotham City is
literally under a cloud as oppressive as its Fritz Lang architecture and
its Stalinist colossi.  And all those faces everywhere in this most
impersonal of all cities, are they masks, watchers, or tutelary deities?
The photography frames individually and beautifully composed painterly
portraits and cityscapes, all swimming in the same darkness as the
characters.  The only human part of the story that attracts Burton is
the confusion and twisted psyches of the heroes and villains, suitably
interested more in stirring up the line between them than in sorting
them out into neat categories, more interested in their "difficulty with
duality" than in spotlighting their singularity.
     Of the principals, Michael Keaton has the most difficult job.
Everyone else gets to go over the top, but he has to be strong and
masterful, a god as impersonal as his cowl can make him.  But within the
straitjacket of his persona, he gives us a man troubled by his
obsession, introspective, trapped, struggling to understand.  His Bruce
Wayne is more human this time, not incapable of jibing Alfred or of
trying to make a connection with the one woman who might be capable of
understanding him.
     Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman is completely captivating; of course,
the transformation from Selina Kyle makes no logical sense, but it's
wonderful and exciting to watch.  The feminist text that informs her
character gives it some meaning, some resonance in our non-comic-book
world.  Pfeiffer presents Kyle/Catwoman in several modes and degrees,
all of them fascinating to watch.  But it is as Catwoman that she
dominates this film, the way Jack Nicholson dominated the previous one.
She slinks, insinuates, and handles her whip with outrageous sexuality.
She can't quite out-fight Batman, but he never breaks her.  She's one
troubled pussycat, but you have got to appreciate her.  I do hope we see
her again.
     As for DeVito, the best thing we can say is that he never reminds
us of Burgess Meredith in a dinner suit with cigarette holder, and never
once says "quack."  In fact, there is a sly reference to the cigarette
holder in one scene, where it is explicitly and violently rejected.  The
makeup is ingenious and admirable in the technical sense, but probably a
mistake in terms of letting DeVito do his thang.  On the other hand, we
now know that Danny DeVito is not limited to the same character, that he
can act with great energy and vigor.  It must have been an exhausting
part to do.
     Christopher Walken's Max Shreck is just your average
megabusinessman with an agenda that includes vampirizing his entire
society.  The name Shreck, by the way, is a reference to the first great
movie vampire, in NOSFERATU (1922).  Walken even has the preternaturally
young/old face of a good vampire.  Like the others, Walken must struggle
with Waters's script with its plot holes and thin characterization, but
unlike the others he is not particularly interesting visually, so he
doesn't get much help from Burton either.  I did feel that the story
about Shreck putting Penguin forward for mayor was Burton's comment on
the willingness of people to find a strong man to solve their problems
for them, regardless of what they may or may not know about him and was
oddly relevant in this summer before Ross Perot opens his campaign for
President.
     I have to wonder why Waters got the script job.  His track record
is none too encouraging with credits like FORD FAIRLANE and HUDSON HAWK,
if those can be called credits.  The script is cluttered with stories,
is cluttered with the kind of sexual jokes that amuse 6th-graders, and
only vaguely motivated actions.  Cause and effect do not count for much
in Tim Burton's universe so he probably didn't notice.  But for those of
us who are still oppressed by the laws of physics and such, we have to
surrender to the moment and not mind, however much we would prefer it to
be otherwise.
     I enjoyed myself enormously and recommend BATMAN RETURNS to you,
but you might as well pay matinee prices.  This movie is going to make a
bundle anyway and you, like me, will want to go a second time to drink
in its visual density.

Title
Review for Cyrano de Bergerac (1990)
     The French-language film CYRANO DE BERGERAC stars France's most
popular actor, Gerard Depardieu.  It is a handsome, affecting version of
this nineteenth century warhorse, a verse play by Edmund Rostand.
     Americans mostly, I assume, know Cyrano through the interpretations
of Jose Ferrer (also called CYRANO DE BERGERAC) and Steve Martin
(ROXANNE).  Martin's pastiche of the source material is a pretty good
vehicle for him, but not necessarily for the story or for his
Cyrano-esque character, but especially not for his Roxanne played most
ineptly by Daryl Hannah.  Jose Ferrer's 1950s film, on the other
extreme, is extremely stagy in its concept and execution, which is to
say it looks and sounds like a filmed stage play, and Ferrer's delivery
is smooth, polished, Shakespearean, and fluid--a gentleman's Cyrano.
     The best quality that Depardieu brings to Cyrano is his roughness,
his lack of smoothness, polish, and Shakespearean (or Comedie Francaise)
delivery.  Depardieu reminds us that Cyrano, despite his aristocratic
lineage is a Gascon, practically a foreigner in Seventeenth-Century
Paris, impecunious, a poet, and a soldier.  His Cyrano has more in
common with the pit than with the precieux in the boxes or sitting on
the stage itself.  This Cyrano is a populist rogue, a thief and a
roughneck, a very angry man who makes us understand why he is so ready
to fight.  In fact, Depardieu's impassioned, angry, noble, and
principled Cyrano reminded me most of that wonderful poet and scalawag
Francois Villon (whose best-known poem is probably the ballade in "Le
Testament" with the refrain "Mais ou son les neiges d'antan" or "Where
are the snows of yesterday").
     CYRANO is filled with wonderful scenes of great detail, texture,
and brilliance.  The opening sequence takes us into a primitive theater
and down into the pit, a place so abandoned to its own chaos that bears
would blush to be seen there.  It is there we first meet Cyrano, who
causes a glorious uproar that results in a duel with a precieu, a kind
of literary dandy of the day.  During the duel, Cyrano promises to
extemporize a ballade and to finish his opponent with the last couplet.
     I have not seen a costume flick that so evoked the nitty-gritty of
early modern life since THE THREE/FOUR MUSKETEERS movies of Richard
Lester.  This Paris not only glitters, it stinks.  War is not only
brave charges, it's slowly starving to death in siege, it's dying in a
suicide charge ordered by a supercilious and vengeful officer.  The
production values and the research behind them alone recommend the
movie.
     I regret I am not sufficiently familiar with the French cinema to
know any of the actors in CYRANO except for Depardieu.  I can tell you
Depardieu has not been better since LA RETOUR DE MARTIN GUERRE and that
his performance totally redeems his reputation from an extremely
objectionable and hateful movie he appeared in four or so years ago,
which I think was released in this country as MENAGE A TROIS.  I can
praise the actor who played Roxanne, but I cannot tell you her name,
alas.  As is the often the case in the best French movies, this one is
densely populated with wonderful character actors, all of whom are
worthy of praise, but who will remain anonymous masters of their craft
for this poster.
     And now a word about the subtitles.  They are a verse translation
by the English writer Anthony Burgess (A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, ENDERBY,
etc.).  At first, when a rhymed couplet appeared on the bottom of the
screen I was a little distracted.  But I quickly acclimated and forgot
about them.  CYRANO is a wordy play and movie, scenes consist of
wonderful speeches more than action.  The subtitles are, in fact,
admirably succinct and easily encompassed without losing sight of the
screen area above them.
     This CYRANO works hard at not being a filmed play.  The result is
sumptuous, detailed, and lively camera work.

Title
Review for Spartacus (1960)
     SPARTACUS is Stanley Kubrick's classic epic about a slave rebellion
in republican Rome.  It was originally released in, I think, 1960, to
tepid reviews and packed houses.  Of the *major* Academy awards (best
picture, director, actor, actress) it was nominated only for best
picture; in all it won four Oscars, including Best Supporting Actor for
Peter Ustinov.  Despite its cold reception from the Academy, it was the
biggest money maker of its release year.
     On May 3 a restored SPARTACUS was released in several U.S. cities,
including Seattle.  I played hookey from work and Lyndol and I spent
three-and-a-half happy hours on a glorious spring day in the dark of one
of Seattle's largest houses watching a SPARTACUS that was even more
wonderful than it was when I saw it first-run at the age of 15 or 16.
I hope you get a chance to see this, the second greatest epic Hollywood
ever made (LAWRENCE OF ARABIA being the greatest by most, and my,
accounting).
     One of the reasons it is better this time around is it includes a
now-famous scene where Crassus (Lawrence Olivier) makes a pass at his
body-slave Antoninus (Tony Curtis).  The story is that Olivier insisted
that the scene be filmed even though Kubrick and the others knew that
the scene was unreleasable, so the soundtrack was never recorded.  For
the restoration, the scene was found in tact in the three-color
separations used to reconstruct the negative (the original negative
having long since been allowed to disintegrate); Curtis dubbed his
dialog by pitching his voice higher and Anthony Hopkins dubbed Olivier's
dialog seamlessly.  The scene is fascinating in its delicacy and
indirection, its talk of having appetites for oysters or snails or both,
as an historical footnote on the presentation of homosexuality in the
films.  More importantly, in terms of the overall film, it goes a long
ways toward filling out Curtis's character as well as his sudden
appearance among the volunteers joining Spartacus and the other escaped
gladiators on slopes of Mt.  Vesuvius; I never really understood
Antoninus before.
     Another reason why SPARTACUS is better the second time around is
that I am older and I understand the subtext now.  As a teenager, I
reacted merely to the spectacle.  As an old fart, I now react to the
theme of personal freedom that informs the entire movie.  The script was
written Dalton Trumbo, the great film writer who was blacklisted during
the Red Scare of the late Forties.  He had survived for years by selling
scripts through fronts and by using noms de plume; I understand he
actually was given a writing Oscar under an alias.  He could not enter
any studio in Hollywood.  Meetings had to be held in private homes.
Stanley Kubrick to his everlasting credit got tired of the hyprocrisy,
issued Trumbo a gatepass one day, and used Trumbo's real name on the
screen credits.  I tell you it gave me a catch in the throat to see the
credit, to see "Dalton Trumbo" proudly, defiantly displayed in those
huge 70-mm letters.  
     Just as the theme is human liberty, so the background of the film
itself recapitulates the theme.  Trumbo said he knew the studio
wouldn't go for the obvious stuff like the scene mentioned previously
and choked on the slight nudity and sex (Jean Simmons has two coy nude
scenes that were highly controversial in their day with the Legion of
Decency and other bluenoses), but he knew the studio execs weren't
astute enough to understand the really controversial aspect of the film,
its theme.  This theme is just as resonant today as it was then when
SPARTACUS marked the "official" end of the McCarthy Era.
     A third reason for liking SPARTACUS even more today is that no one
makes these wonderful sweeping 70-mm epics today.  Thirty years ago the
budget originally called for $12 million; you could not bring it in for
under $200 million today.  Hollywood made a terrible choice when it
turned its greedy back on 70-mm; the brilliant clarity of the medium
brings tears to the eyes of a movie lover, the tears of pain and regret.
     And these epic stars are no longer available either.  Look at the
cast: Kirk Douglas (Spartacus), Laurence Olivier (Crassus), Jean Simmons
(Varinnia), Charles Laughton (Gracchus), Peter Ustinov (Batiacus), John
Gavin (Julius Caesar), Tony Curtis (Antoninus), and literally a cast of
thousands.  Actors like Douglas and Olivier are more than equal to the
challenge of the epic medium.  Gavin was the weakest of the principals,
but gosh he was handsome--what happened to him, old farts want to know.
Jean Simmons was a marvel of strength and delicacy, a stronger version
of Audrey Hepburn, who didn't find real strength until she became
middle-aged.  But the absolute treats are Laughton and Ustinov, who have
two scenes together that ought to be required viewing for all interested
in acting for the screen.
     SPARTACUS was restored by the same team that restored LAWRENCE OF
ARABIA, the restoration that sparked the current wave of restored
classics.  
     This is more than recommended, this is required viewing.
And now a note from the Moderator:
"Breaking the Hollywood Blacklist: The darkest chapter of the American
entertainment industry was the years of the Hollywood blacklist.  People
accused of disloyalty to the government could not confront their
accusers, but would suddenly find that nobody would hire them.  Careers
were destroyed by innuendo.  One blacklisted writer was Dalton Trumbo.
Before the years of the blacklist he was a successful screenwriters, but
when his name appeared on the blacklist he could submit only very few
scripts and then only under a pseudonym.  Then in 1960 two major films
were released with screen credit given to Trumbo under his own name.  On
both films the directors and the lead actors risked being blacklisted
themselves by insisting to their studios that Trumbo's name appear in
the credits in type no smaller than their own.  When there was no fuss
from the public, it was generally acknowledged that the blacklist was
dead.  The films were EXODUS and SPARTACUS.  The directors were Otto
Preminger and Stanley Kubrick; the stars were Paul Newman and Kirk
Douglas."

Title
Review for Singin' in the Rain (1952)
     SINGIN' IN THE RAIN is film directed by Gene Kelly and Stanley
Donen and produced by Arthur Freed.  It was written by Adolph Green and
Betty Comden, based on a song by Freed and Nacio Herb Brown.  The film
stars Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor, Debbie Reynolds, and Jean Hagen.
Choreography is by Kelly and Donen, the songs by Freed.  It was first
released on April 10, 1952.
     SINGIN' IN THE RAIN is simply the best movie musical ever made.  It
has started a Fortieth Anniversary revival run with a brand new 35mm
print.  You must see it.  It is like seeing it for the first time with
the brilliant, jewel-like Technicolor fresh and glowing, the print free
of scratches, up on the big screen, and Gene Kelly breaking your heart
with the pure innocent joy of his dance in the rain.
     If ever the word classic applied to a musical number, it applies to
the "Singin' in the Rain" number.  It starts off with a happy adult man
and ends with a little boy splashing in the flooded street and then
skipping off with not a care, free even of his umbrella.  Not only is
there a physical joy to watching Kelly dance in the rain, but it is a
revelation when you can distance yourself enough to watch the narrative
strength of the choreography, the detailed climb from adultness to
childishness.  If that cop hadn't shown up, Kelly would still be dancing
there; it's one number you want never to end, but when it does you are
as transformed as the dancer/singer.
     The song, according to one story, was inspired when Arthur Freed,
who had just graduated from Broadway High School in Seattle and opened
his own music store on Pine Street, watched a man one gloomy, rainy
Seattle afternoon outside his shop "just singing and dancing in the
rain."  He wrote the song with Nasio Herb Brown for one of the first big
movie musicals, THE HOLLYWOOD REVUE (MGM, 1929).  It has also been used
in LITTLE NELLIE KELLY (1940) and A CLOCKWORK ORANGE (1971).
     Freed, later a top producer of musicals (THE WIZARD OF OZ, MEET ME
IN ST. LOUIS), hired Green and Comden (ON THE TOWN) to build a movie
around his song, now a standard.  It took them a month to nail down the
unifying concept: showcasing Brown and Freed songs against the
background they were written in, namely, Hollywood's transition to the
talkies.  The script was finished in April, 1951, Freed having selected
"Fit as a Fiddle," "You Were Meant for Me," "Good Mornin'," and nine
others.  Kelly created the fifteen-minute Broadway Melody ballet and
agreed to star in and co-direct.  Production closed Nov 21, 1951.  It
cost $2,540,800 to make ($620,996 over budget).  It previewed at the De
Anza Theater, Riverside, California, on December 21, to a rave audience.
It premiered at Grauman's Egyptian Theater instead of the more
prestigious Grauman's Chinese Theater, where the opening and closing
scenes were shot.  Apparently, the studio was not terribly supportive of
the film.  It turned out to be the tenth most popular film of 1952,
grossing $7,665,000.  However, it was received only two Oscar
nominations and won neither.
     Some other trivia about it: Green and Comden had originally seen it
as a vehicle for Howard Keel as a bit player in silent movies who
becomes a singing cowboy star.  This, of course, survives in the
stuntman sequence.  The song "Make 'em Laugh" was plagiarized from Cole
Porter's "Be a Clown," used in the Freed musical THE PIRATE.  Donen has
acknowledged that was "100 per cent plagiarism."
     A lot of you know that Jean Hagen, the screechy-voiced bimbo,
dubbed Debbie Reynolds, who is supposed to be dubbing Jean Hagen.  One
of the things I noticed this time around was how impressed I was by
Hagen's performance.  She was nominated for an Oscar for the role and
deservedly so.  It is easy to dismiss the part because she does such a
good job of making us dislike the character.
     Gene Kelly had a bad head cold during the filming of the Singin' in
the Rain sequence and was afraid, terrified, of developing pneumonia
during the two day shoot.  I noticed his voice was a little hoarse when
he says goodnight to Reynolds at the beginning of the sequence, but
otherwise one would never guess.
     The uncredited cameos include silent comedian Snub Pollard, "Our
Gang" kids Baby Patsy, Dale Odell, Roberta Williams, and Gerald
Carpenter, and 1930s star Mae Clark (of grapefruit fame).
     (A lot the above information I cribbed from William Arnold in the
Seattle P-I.)
     This Fortieth Anniversary tour is a rare opportunity to see one of
the great films of world cinema as it was meant to be seen.  In 1988 a
poll of world film critics placed SINGIN' IN THE RAIN fifth among the
world's best 100 films--CITIZEN KANE ranked ahead of it, but CASABLANCA
came in ninth.

Title
Review for Homicide (1991)
     HOMICIDE is a film directed and written by David Mamet, produced by
Michael Hausman and Edward Pressman.  The film stars Joe Mantegna,
William H. Macy, and Natalija Nogulich.  Rated R for language and
violence.
     HOMICIDE is David Mamet's third film (HOUSE OF CARDS, THINGS
CHANGE) and has many fine qualities to recommend it.  However, it does
suffer in several areas, too, and can only be considered a qualified
success, at best.
     Joe Mantegna plays a Jewish cop, Bobby Gold, in New York City.
Mantegna has earned directors' and audiences' respect in a long string
of solid performances, including Woody Allen's ALICE, Francis Ford
Coppola's THE GODFATHER III, and (reportedly) Barry Levinson's BUGSY
(which will be opening soon in the Seattle area).  And Mantegna has a
history of working with playwright Mamet going back to their days in
Chicago's Organic Theater Company, as well as parts in Mamet's earlier
films.  Despite that, or perhaps because of it, Mantegna fails to give
us a convincing performance.
     Perhaps the lead character and the script itself are too heavily
invested with irony and the sense of the cosmic joke to not weigh us the
audience down with confusion and ambiguous reactions to Bobby Gold's
identity crisis.  More likely, neither the actor or the writer is able
to convince us that this detective, who has lived in New York's ethnic
olla for forty years, would suddenly suffer the conflicts of interest
and identity his is supposed to undergo.  He has to choose between his
partner (William H. Macy) and the beautiful woman (Natalija Nogulich,
who reminds me of Anglica Huston, between the fraternity of cops and
"being a Jew" as it appears to be defined within this context.  In one
night, we have a vast, desperate attempt to right the wrongs of a
lifetime.  But we have no idea where the energy for all this angst is
coming from.
     Beyond the motivational hole, we still have a wonderfully
atmospheric cop drama, shot by Roger Deakins, who was also the cameraman
for BARTON FINK.  Character parts are filled mostly by New York stage
actors and are suitably unfamiliar and eccentric.  The dialog is
hard-boiled cynicism, although one scene between Mantegna and Macy
sounds way too much like DRAGNET.  The film opens with great suspense
and violence and surprises; the subplot started there carries the film
forward with emotional and professional conflicts, as well as providing
chases and more violence.  Mamet shows great skill in this genre.
     I can recommend HOMICIDE, but matinee prices might make the
problems more palatable.

Title
Review for Edward Scissorhands (1990)
     Tim Burton is the director who brought us BEETLEJUICE, BATMAN, and
now EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is, briefly speaking, a
kind of fairy tale version of FRANKENSTEIN, but unfortunately the fairy
tale element is not made clear early on and the enormous holes in the
story are pretty darn distracting until you accept the conventions of
fairy tales and throw logic and verisimilitude onto the trash heap (if
you do).
     There are indeed yawning chasms in the story's logic which are only
bridged by the sense of wonder and delight which Johnny Depp elicits in
your humble poster.  OK, I'm going to be perfectly frank with you and
say I have not a clue as to who Johnny Depp is, what he does, or even
what he looks if he doesn't look like Edward Scissorhands.  I have it
in my mind that he might be a musician.  But actor or musician,
pre-Edward, he ought to be recognized from now own as a brilliant
comedic actor, highly reminiscent of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton.
I have to say that his performance is nothing less than inspired; it
absolutely saves the movie from its own inconsistencies and illogic.
     On the other hand, or scissors, Winona Ryder is completely lost
inside her blonde wig in this movie, to say nothing of wasted.  Burton
seems to have directed her to shed all hints of personality.  Quite
honestly, any presentable young woman off the street could have
delivered the same performance.
     Fortunately for me, she is shines with intense brilliance in
another Christmas movie this season, MERMAIDS, otherwise I might write
her off as completely forgetable.
     Diane Wiess plays Winona's mother, an Avon lady who discovers
Edward in his castle on the edge of the most outrageously bland
subdivision ever put on film; Burton out-Waters John Waters in his
vision of a pastel hell.  Wiess is her usual, reliable, wonderful self;
mothering, protecting, always slightly out of synch with the world she
lives in.  When she enters the castle, which was decorated by a spacey
descendant of the person who did up Dracula's, and she says "It's your
Avon lady," it's completely right.
     Burton, the director, shines in the look and feel of EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS, but his story sense is as out of control as ever.  And
will he realize that Danny Elfman's music is as irritating and
distracting as it is ugly and pretentious, and stop using him?
     Another surprising deficiency were the models and mattes used to
establish the castle and the suburb.  Completely unconvincing,
embarrassingly obvious.  For a movie that puts such an emphasis on its
look, has spent lots of time and money on special effects, make-up, and
cutlery, this seems especially odd.
     But to end this on a positive note, let me mention the small role
of the Scientist as played by Vincent Price, who is looking rather old
and frail these days, but is still an icon to be reckoned with.  It was
the Scientist who created Edward and died before he could give him
hands.  In a flashback, we visit his laboratory cum factory.  He is not
so much a Mad Scientist, as he is a Whimsical Scientist; his machines
are humorously anthropomorphic and I for one will forever envy him his
cookie cutters.
     I recommend EDWARD SCISSORHANDS if you can leave your logic in the
lobby; only then will you enjoy it as it should be enjoyed.

Title
Review for Addams Family, The (1991)
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY is a movie directed by Barry Sonnenfeld, produced
by Scott Rudin, from a script by Caroline Thompson and Larry Wilson.  It
stars Raul Julia, Anjelica Huston, Christopher Lloyd, Christina Ricci.
Rated PB-13, "due to subject matter."
     THE ADDAMS FAMILY is derived from Charles Addams's classic "New
Yorker" cartoons and from the 1964-1966 U.S. television series (starring
Carolyn Jones and John Astin).  Rudin and Sonnenfeld, a first-time
director, decided to concentrate more on the cartoons than the TV
version, to good effect, I think.  The opening sequence is a direct lift
from a famous Addams Family cartoon, in fact.  I enjoyed the resultant
silliness.  Indeed, one of the strengths of the movie is that it is
silly, it knows it's silly, it rejoices in its knowledge.  It is serious
about silliness.
     The performers represent a dream cast, the kind of inevitable
choices that result from a lot of selling and looking around.  Anjelica
Huston is the only woman in the U.S. who could have played Morticia as
well as Carolyn Jones did nearly 30 years ago, at least she surely gives
us that impression.  Morticia is the perfect mother, the all-American
mom seen in a negative, just as the Family itself is the all-American
family with their every pixel reversed.  Of course, Morticia is a
patrician mom, but she's still concerned with her children's happiness,
as when she temporarily interrupts little Wednesday about to electrocute
her cheerfully loathsome brother Pugsley.  One of the ways we knows the
Addamses are our opposites is their cheerfulness and domestic bliss.
Another, of course, is the current of sexuality always a molecule or two
beneath the surface.  Whether Tish is speaking French or strapped to the
Wheel, her eyes are merry and wise, never would she consider raising her
voice or disturbing her flawless complexion of dead-white porcelain with
negative thoughts.
     Whether Raul Julia comes up to manic John Astin's mark as Gomez
Addams, Julia gives it a great shot.  He is the last of the great
romantics, the last of the Latin Lovers.  He glitters, he sparkles, he
burns brightly.  He is vastly more alive than you and I will ever be.
He also interjects some new emotions into Gomez' psychology, if that's
the word.  This Gomez feels guilt, remorse, dejection, suspicion,
depression, failure, and is not always in complete control.  And he
sings and dances.  And of course, Julia looks and sounds a lot more like
a Gomez than Astin did.
     Christopher Lloyd plays Uncle Fester, or does he?  That is the crux
of the plot, such as it is.  The part was pioneered by a defoliated
Jackie Coogan.  Lloyd apparently had to gain a lot of weight and loose
some height to fit into Fester's shapeless robe.  The result is a
remarkably unattractive Lloyd, a monster turning into a kindly uncle (in
the Addams's terms), torn between his villainous mother, played by
Elizabeth Wilson, and the somewhat perilous love the Addamses offer.
There's a wonderful scene between Morticia and Fester in the Family's
graveyard; she tours the ancestors' graves and monument, filling him and
us in on the grand tradition to which is an heir apparent.  Lloyd gives
us an excellent performance, vastly better than anything Coogan could
have come up with, if that's the standard.
     A word about Christina Ricci, who plays Wednesday:  wonderful.
Wednesday is full of woe, of course, fascinated with ways to kill
Pugsley, as who would not be.  Ricci establishes a remarkably
sophisticated character, who more than holds own against the adult
actors.
     There's a lot about the look and feel of THE ADDAMS FAMILY that
makes me think of EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and BEETLEJUICE and no wonder.
Caroline Thompson worked on both scripts and Larry Wilson was Tim
Burton's co-producer on BEETLEJUICE.  Marc Shalman's score sounds like
recycle Danny Elfman, who composes for Burton's movies.  The Family
graveyard, in particular, bears visual resemblances for both of the
above Burton opera.
     Over all, I was completely charmed and taken with THE ADDAMS
FAMILY.  It lived up to my every expectation and then some.  The grand
ball scene reintroduced me to the sisters Flora and Fauna and to Cousin
It, inter alios.  Like Addams's original cartoons, violence is never
shown on the screen.  Wednesday may pull the switch on the Pugsley's
electric chair, but we never see or hear the aftermath.  Like the sexual
tensions between Morticia and Gomez, nothing is ever explicit; that
would be too common, too much like the lives you and I live.
     I have this theory about the appeal of the Addams Family.  By
turning the American family inside out, by reversing our pixels, Charles
Addams said to us that under our costumes we are all lovable monsters,
that all our lives are weird beyond imaging and explaining.  That
violence and sexuality lives with us as closely as our children or our
siblings.  And it's ok.  It's harmless and funny, and dangerous, and
ever present.  The Addams Family is who we are, not the abberation, not
the exception, but the rule, the archetype.  And we love them.
     I can recommend THE ADDAMS FAMILY to anyone who is not a terminally
humorless dweeb, as are the reviewer for Seattle's two daily newspapers,
one of whom actually was clueless enough to complain, "And what are these
people, vampires or what?"  That would be telling and it would spoil
the joke.  Pay full ticket price, if you have to, you will get your
money's worth.

Title
Review for Reversal of Fortune (1990)
     This movie is based on Alan Dershowitz's book about his defense of
Claus von Bulow, who had been convicted of attempting to kill his rich,
socialite wife Sunny with a large injection of insulin that put her into
a permanent vegetative state.  Dershowitz is a prominent law prof.  at
Harvard who writes a syndicated column on constitutional, legal, and
liberal issues for the New York Times.
     The movie is narrated by Glenn Close, whose character Sunny is
already in the final coma of her life (she is "alive" today).  This is a
permanent stumbling block for the movie.  I'm never very comfortable
with a voice-over; movies ought not to need narrators.  And a
out-of-body narrator is really pushing the limits.
     Jeremy Irons turns in an astonishing performance as the chimeric
von Bulow (Ron Silver as Dershowitz says to Irons: "You're a very weird
man."  And Irons as von Bulow replies: "You have no idea.")  It is the
kind of strange and eerie characterization of an unknowable character
that leaves one gasping in admiration and wondering where in the name of
all that's cinematic did Irons get the clue, the resource, the insight,
the starting point in creating such a very weird man.
     Silvers' Dershowitz is never explained to us.  We get a some
defining scenes and speeches about his role as a man wild about law and
protecting the poor and the innocent; even the defense of von Bulow is
seen as a way of keeping the poor from being victimized by the rich (for
an explanation of this, seek elsewhere), but these are templates of the
standard liberal, Jewish lawyer.  His Jewishness is featured prominently
throughout the movie, by the way.  Not quite a stereotype, however.
     Through the early parts of the movie, I feared that Close, who is
one of my personal faves, was not going to get a chance to act.
However, through the miracle of flashbacks she got a couple of chances
to remind once again how very  good she is.
     The pleasure, and perhaps purpose, of REVERSAL OF FORTUNE is the
wonderful acting.  The problem, other than the narrative, is that the
movie is terribly schizophrenic.  Half of it a legal-procedures movie,
not unlike PRESUMED INNOCENT, for example.  Part of it is a character
study.  Very little is a whodunit.  (Since this is a true story, and
all the principals are real and living, this last aspect had to be
treated, I imagine, with some circumspection.)  
     Oh, yes, and it's rather funny in many places, but the newspapers
ads calling it a comedy are probably a fall-back marketing strategy.  It
ain't a comedy.

Title
Review for Ballad of Little Jo, The (1993)
     THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO is a film written and directed by Maggie
Greenwald.  The cast includes Suzy Amis, David Chung, Bo Hopkins, Ian
McKellen, Carrie Snodgrass, and Rene Auberjonois.  Rated R for violence
and sex scenes.
     THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO is based the life of Josephine/Joe
Monaghan, a woman who spent her life in the frontier mining districts
of Idaho as a man.  Josephine was expelled from her wealthy Eastern
family for having a baby out of wedlock.  She drifts out West and soon
discovers, almost too late, that a woman without a male protector is a
victim in the making.  After being betrayed and narrowly escaping a
gang rape, she finds the only ready-to-wear clothes available are men's
and thus almost casually begins a lifetime role as a cross-dresser.
The historical Little Jo is mostly unknown, but she did become a cowboy
in Owyhee County, Idaho.  She was thought to be "odd" for her
stand-offish attitudes to drinking and whoring, but enjoyed some respect
for her horsemanship.  Her secret was discovered only upon her death.
(See THE COWGIRL COMPANION by Gail Gilchriest for information about
Little Jo and the other known female cross-dressers of the Old West, as
well as women in the West in general.)
     One should note en passant that the phenomenon of women assuming
men's clothes and men's roles is by no means either extinct nor
unnecessary even in today's society.  I have a friend who says she
feels she loses all her personal power if she wears women's
clothes--even women's jeans, instead of men's.  And it is still
difficult for women to pursue full careers in many fields--director
Greenwald suggested in a New York Times article--"whether it's playing
jazz or directing films or flying planes.  Then there's being president
of the United States." And there is the locally famous case of Billy
Tipton, the American jazz pianist and saxophonist, who upon his death
in 1989 in Spokane, was discovered to be a woman and who originally
assumed a man's persona to get ahead in jazz.
     However, the pressure to pass a man was even greater in the last
century than in this one.  Even wearing clothes "inappropriate to one's
sex" was illegal throughout the states and territories.  On the other
hand, the mere act of wearing pants might well have been enough to let
a woman pass as a man, the sight was so unthinkable to most people that
they appear to have been blinded to any other possibility.
     And it is to everyone's credit that Suzy Amis--even though she
never really convinces us--is presented without mascara or lip
gloss--unlike Barbra Steisand in YENTL or Julie Andrews in
VICTOR/VICTORIA.  Amis worked with voice and movement coaches and
pumped iron and learned to shoot and herd sheep on location in the Red
Lodge country of Montanta.  Amis does an admirable job as Little Jo,
giving us little hints that help flesh out a character that is by the
nature of her situation strong, silent, and unable to talk about
herself.  Josephine was something of a rebel even back in Buffalo and
that streak helped set the direction of her life as Joe.  Amis gives us
a performance that is full of surprises, entirely as original as the
character she plays.
     Amis's fellow actors provide strong backup for her, especially
Rene Auberjonois as the peddler, Ian McKellan as the complex,
contradictory, alcoholic cabinmate who first teaches Joe about
surviving in the West, beautiful David Chung as Tinman (Tienman) the
Chinese man who helps set her free to be a complete person again, and
Bo Hopkins as the bigotted, violent, good-hearted neighbor who wants to
be Joe's friend and who can never quite gap the distance between them.
All are excellent and pretty much represent the range of the types of
male characters in the film.  The film's view of men is as complex as
anything else in it.
     Complementing this excellent cast are the cinematography of Declan
Quinn and the music of David Mansfield.  Quinn gives a full, lush look
at the panoramic as well as the close-up beauties of the intermountain
West, in addition to interior work that looks like available light--the
beauty of sunshine through a cabin window or the murk of a cold and
grimy tavern/whorehouse.  Mansfield's music is charming and appropriate
throughout, picking up folk and ethnic themes, but never overwhelming
the scenes.
     But clearly the real star of LITTLE JO is writer/director Maggie
Greenwald.  Greenwald has worked carefully and imaginatively within her
limited budget to give us a rich and full realized film.  I liked this
film even more than I did the excellent 1000 PIECES OF GOLD, Nancy
Kelly's film about Lalu Nathoy (Rosalyn Chao), the Chinese woman sold
into slavery and prostitution who made a life for herself in Idaho.
Both stories, based in Western history, have their points of
similarity, but in terms of treatment LITTLE JO has the more polished
look and feel.  My only quibble is that the final scenes of death and
discovery do not feel entirely necessary and drag out an excellent film
to an ending that seems to put the final emphasis on Bo Hopkins instead
of Suzy Amis.  I think an epilog would have been well used here.
     However, THE BALLARD OF LITTLE JO is a first-rate film and I
recommend it without reservation to all of you.

Title
Review for Sister Act (1992)
     SISTER ACT is a film directed by Emile Ardolino, from a script by
"Joseph Howard."  It stars Whoopie Goldberg, Maggie Smith, and Harvey
Keitel, with Kathy Najimy, Wendy Makkena, and Bill Nunn.  Rate PG for
language.
     SISTER ACT showed a lot of potential to be the summer's sleeper hit
when I saw it at an after-work matinee on Friday.  It was booked into
two of the auditoria in the local multiplex and my theater was packed
with very happy movie-goers.  I know I enjoyed it a lot more than I
thought I would after reading the reviews in our local dailies.  If it
does take off and become a money machine, it will be a triumph in a way.
From what I've read, this was not a happy movie to make.  Goldberg said
she'd never work for Disney or Touchstone again.  Bette Midler was
offered the part of Deloris Van Cartier first, a part conceived
especially for her.  When Goldberg took it on, it had to be
substantially rewritten, and she has even accused the studio of a racist
script.  I understand that seven writers (including Carrie Fisher)
contributed to the final script.  The script is attributed to the
traditional pseudonym Joseph Howard as a result.  It was made on the
cheap, for a low-end $15 million, as part of Disney's new policy, and as
a result does not appear at its best -- shoddily produced and big,
uncaring story holes.
     Still, SISTER ACT has a lot of power resources that helped it
overcome its own problems.  For one, the director, Emile Ardolino (DIRTY
DANCING) has a proven track record as a hitmaker; he gives the film its
energy and timing and the audience has no choice but to be sucked into
the film by its own momentum.  Whoopie Goldberg, even though she is by
no means at her sharpest here -- sanitized and toned down by the Disney
image -- still gives us her best comedy/action film yet (perhaps
excepting GHOST in which she was a supporting player).  And she
generously shares the spotlight with Kathy Najimy as the bouncy,
sizeable Sister Mary Patrick and with Wendy Makkena as Sister Mary
Robert the novice who finds herself in her singing.  And of course, the
estimable Maggie Smith is letter perfect as Mother Superior; no one on
either side of the Atlantic can purse a lip better than Maggie Smith.
It is the friendships that Goldberg makes in the convent that are the
emotional heart of this warmly funny movie.
     And it is amazingly funny, especially given the hackneyed and
entirely predictable script, which is pretty much THE SOUND OF MUSIC in
reverse.  Some of the best moments are the rehearsals and performances
of the nuns' choir, the direction of which Whoopie takes over.  And the
songs, Motown classics and Salve Regina, are given the
R&B-goes-to-church treatment with respect and affection, and they work
in "making a joyful noise."  Frankly, you haven't lived until you've
heard "My Guy" or "I Will Follow Him" in an ecclesiastical context.
     I can cheerfully recommend to SISTER ACT to all but the most
serious among you.  It is a warm, funny movie, an ideal summer break,
without a thought in its cinematic head, but with lots of chemistry,
friendship, respect, and energy.  You can even pay full ticket price
with a clean conscience.
     (In the Seattle area, SISTER ACT is playing at several
theaters, including the Crossroads down a piece from the
corporate campus.)

Title
Review for Paris Is Burning (1990)
     PARIS IS BURNING is a documentary film by Jennie Livingstone.  It
stars Dorian Corey, Pepper Labeija, Venus Xtravaganza, Octavia
St. Laurent, Willi Ninja, Anji Xtravaganza, and Freddie Pendavis.
Running time approx.  75 minutes.
     I have only one complaint about PARIS IS BURNING: at 75 minutes, it
is too short.  The film was shot mainly in 1987, and its subject is
somewhat more familiar to the mainstream  now than then thanks to
Madonna's video, "Vogue", and other commercializations.  But the
subject, the culture built around Harlem drag balls, and the subjects,
the people who have structured their lives around the balls and their
culture, remain deeply moving, shocking, astonishing,  fascinating,
foreign, and near.
     One of the great strengths -- and there are many -- of PARIS IS
BURNING is the clarity with which the film explains this culture to
those of us who have never been exposed to it.  As I have had occasion
to mention from time to time, I am gay; I'm all white, middle-class,
Seattle-born and -bred, and far,  far away from Harlem both in geography
and mind.  The ball  culture comes as a revelation, like discovering a
colony of  Martians in woods behind Microsoft.
     And yet, I know these people.  I recognize their hopes and fears.
We do talk a common language.  And I come to love and care for them, as
much as one can for any flickering, celluloid ghost.  They have vision
and purpose, and they live to express that  vision with guts and
dedication and vast reservoirs of courage.
     It is the people in PARIS IS BURNING who continue to live in my
mind.  The wonderful old queen (Dorian Corey?), sits at her make-up
table, working on the paint job, and saying wonderful things to the
camera (is this Harvey Fierstein when he grows up?).  She has the last
lines in the movie and they come as the kind of revelatory *mot* that is
so *juste* that one's breath is taken away, as if from a blow to the
gut.
     There's Venus Xtravaganza the petite, tragic transsexual who wants
The Operation, a home in the 'burbs, the hubby and picket fence.  She
has completely, perhaps insanely, bought into the Great American Dream,
and she breaks your heart doing it.
     There's Pepper Labeija, the Mother of the House of Labeija, looking
and talking like a truly hip Eddie Murphy or Arsenio Hall; wise,
protective, seeing the troubles as well as the triumphs.  There's Willi
Ninja, who wants to take the House of Ninja to Paris.  There's the
Freddie Pendavis, who not only wants to be star, but may make it, if any
of them does.
     Two things are made achingly clear in the movie: the cruel hoax of
our material culture -- the idea that things make us happy; and
aggressive, combative nature of drag.  
     The private dreams of many of the interviewees is for wealth,
success, stardom, beautiful clothes, beautiful things that they don't
have to steal.  And there is the concept of "realness" -- the different
categories at the balls emphasize the criterion of a total
verisimilitude in not only the look but the attitude of being a
"schoolgirl," "town and country," "executive," or "high-fashion
Parisian."  This is not satire or burlesque, this is striving for the
length of time it takes to walk the floor of being a prep or
businessman.  These people are three-times outside the white, suburban
culture they emulate in their drag.  Many of them are transvestites or
transsexuals, all of them are outsiders, even in the context of Harlem.
And the balls are how they survive the clash between their dreams and
their reality.
     There's a longish section in the middle of the film about several
levels of drag war that culminates in a dance of domination -- two
people dancing against each other, never touching, each seeking to outdo
the other's contortionist poses -- the one more successful is in trying
oneself into a knot is the winner in this stylized and stylish surrogate
for street fighting.  As people remark from time to time, it's tough
being gay in New York.
     I've had occasion to talk to other people -- straight and gay --
about this film.  Every one of them was, if you will forgive the antique
locution, blown away by it.  We all have our favorite moments, our
personal revelations.  It's speaks to us, each of us, regardless of our
backgrounds or experiences.  Octavia St. Laurent, Anji Xtravaganza are
us and Jennie Livingston's direction and awareness make this all too
clear.

Title
Review for Black Robe (1991)
     BLACK ROBE is movie directed by Bruce Beresford from a script by
Brian Moore and based Moore's 1985 novel of the same name.  The film
stars Lothaire Bluteau, Aden Young, Sandrine Holt, August Schellenberg,
and Tantoo Cardinal.  Rated R due to violence, sex.
     BLACK ROBE is the story of an odyssey, both physical and spiritual,
of a French Jesuit missionary who in 1634 sets out from the Quebec of
Champlain 1500 miles with a band of Algonquins by canoe to a mission
which may or may not exist.  The priest, Father Laforgue, is played by
Lothaire Bluteau.  (Bluteau played the title role in JESUS OF MONTREAL.)
Laforgue begins as a rigid European dedicated to saving the savages,
ends as someone else.
     Brian (pronounced Bree-an) Moore, the author of THE LONELINESS OF
JUDITH HEARNE and THE LUCK OF GINGER COFFEY (which both became movies),
was quick, in an interview with The Seattle Times' John Hartl this week,
to dismiss comparisons of BLACK ROBE with DANCES WITH WOLVES.  Both
films are revisionist historical dramas about the doomed cultures of
Native Americans in their early contacts with whites.  Both use the
white character as the narrative focus.  Both use Native American actors
in appropriate roles and depict them speaking their own languages.  Both
use subtitles for the non-English dialogue.  Moore said, "[DWW] is an
old-fashioned, main-stream movie, except that the whites are the bad
guys.  And the Indians are all absolute saints, just like they were in
THE MISSION.  We tried not to do that."
     "The only thing that shocked us when we saw DANCES WITH WOLVES was
the use of subtitles for the Indians.  We thought our film would be the
first to do that."
     One obvious difference is that BLACK ROBE exposes its audience to a
different cultural group than the more commonly used Plains Indians,
namely Northern Woodlands culture.  Three native groups appear in the
film: Algonquins, Iroquois, and Hurons.  They are distinctively depicted
and even the Iroquois are presented as humans, albeit with their own
standards and expectations.  This difference by itself makes the film
fascinating and novel.
     The Native Americans by speaking their own languages and commenting
on the actions and ideas of the whites, especially Laforgue, give us a
Rashomon-esque effect -- multiple perceptions creating multiple truths
-- give the audience new insights into their own culture.  The culture
clashes, the culture shocks are often amusing, the only comic relief
often in what is mostly a very serious, tense and sober film, full of an
air of impending disaster, like the fall moving toward winter.
     Another cinematic quality that recommends BLACK ROBE is the use of
landscape photography.  Every outdoor shot frames scenery that is often
literally breath-taking; by that I mean that I gasped frequently at the
backgrounds of the human drama transpiring in the foreground.
Beresford's cinematographer is Peter James, who worked on DRIVING MISS
DAISY and MISTER JOHNSON, too.  Because of budgetary limitations the
film was pretty much shot in narrative order to capture the changing
seasons.  Beresford added flashbacks to Laforgue's earlier life in
France as well as black-and-white dream sequences.  These try to do the
job of the internal monologues that dominate Moore's novel.  One of the
Seattle critics thought the film needed a voice-over narration.  I'm
just as glad they avoided that since voice-overs are so problematical.
I think the photography and Bluteau's skills as an actor are sufficient
to fill us on what and why people are thinking and doing as they do.
     Bluteau is an impressive screen presence.  His role is physically
demanding and his character's impassivity and surpressed emotions make
his job all the harder.  He was hardly recognizable as the same actor
who played JESUS OF MONTREAL, a credit to his skills.
     The other actors are uniformly convincing.  Aden Young is plays a
young French who gets permission to travel and assist Black Robe,
ostensibly "for the greater glory of God," but in reality because he's
bored with building huts for Champlain and wants to go adventuring.
August Schellenberg plays the Algonquin chief who becomes a spiritual
teacher for Laforgue, Tantoo Cardinal his wife, and Sandrine Holt his
daughter who shocks Laforgue into a new way of thinking.
     I have one nit to pick, however.  The film makes a point of having
Native Americans speaking their own languages, but the French characters
all speak English.  Father Laforgue's "Indian" name is Black Robe and
when the Native Americans are speaking in their own languages about
Black Robe, they literally say "Black Robe", not even "Robe noir" or
whatever the phrase is in French.  Why don't the French speak French?
Film-making conventions permit us to pretend they are speaking French
instead of English, but given the subtitling of some of the non-English,
this inconsistency and convention becomes all the more illogical and
distracting.
     The film is a joint Canadian-Australian production.  A Canadian
director was originally set to film BLACK ROBE but Moore didn't like the
script and resisted pressure to create a violent hook to open the film.
Fortunately, Beresford came along with the $107 million dollars of clout
from DRIVING MISS DAISY behind him.  There is no U. S. (Hollywood) money
in the production -- although Samuel Goldwyn is distributing the film in
the U.S., as they did HENRY V and LONGTIME COMPANION, two other
hard-to-sell movies -- and it shows both negatively and positively.  The
negatives include a certain lack of visual richness or depth, the kind
of budget shortcuts that one sees in TV movies; one can seldom forget
that one is watching modern people wearing funny clothes.  The positives
include a spiritual depth that makes DANCES WITH WOLVES seem all the
more a shallow star-vehicle that it may have originally.
     Laforgue changes, softens and humanizes his European, Christian
"superiority."  The natives change in various ways that will lead to
their cultural (and physical) extinction.  Laforgue's intentions are
sincere, even when he's being a bigot; his love for the natives at the
end is real.  But he and the rest that will follow are the agents of one
of the great cultural tragedies of history.  BLACK ROBE does the best
job of any similar film I've seen of presenting the Native Americans as
they were.  It neither embraces (or patronizes) them or the stereotypes
built up about them.  They are people, who deserved better than they
got.
     The next step is a film without a white lead on whom to hang the
narrative.  There have been a few over the years, such as the estimable
POWWOW HIGHWAY, but they were mostly independent films with limited
exposure.
     BLACK ROBE cannot, I think, ever find a mass audience a la DANCES
WITH WOLVES.  The main drawback to achieving mass success is that BLACK
ROBE requires an audience that knows something, that can think, that
doesn't require cinematic hand-holding or unambiguous narrative.
     BLACK ROBE is a powerful, beautiful film that is sure to have an
effect on the audiences that do see it, an effect that will be hard to
dismiss or forget.
     I recommend BLACK ROBE at full prices, but do be forewarned that
there is some gruesome violence in the middle of the film.  I closed my
eyes and told Lyndol to tell me when it was over.

Title
Review for Spoorloos (1988)
     THE VANISHING is a Franco-Dutch film directed by George Sluizer,
adapted by Tim Krapp'e from his own novel, and starring Gene Bervoets
(Rex), Johanna Ter Steegel (Saskia), and Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu
(Raymond).
     THE VANISHING is a thriller in which a woman suddenly,
inexplicably, and unaccountably disappears.  That much is rather
familiar territory, at least since Hitchcock's wonderful THE LADY
VANISHES began delighting and frightening us 55 years ago or so.  The
questions of how did it happen, why, and by whose agency are pretty much
the standard ones is this particular subgenre.  Here Sluizer efficiently
disposes of  these in reverse order starting early on into the film.  We
get to see the events leading up to the vanishing first as they relate
to the young Dutch couple on holiday in the South of France and then we
begin again with the bad guy and the long road to leads ultimately to
the vanishing.
     Predestination is a theme here.  Dreams, signs, and defying fate
are the engine that moves all the major characters.  
     After a fight, Rex promises Saskia never to abandon her again.
After Saskia vanishes at a French service station, Rex becomes obsessed
with finding out what happened to her.  If there is horror in this
movie, it is the arbitrariness and accidental nature of life.  The bad
guy, Raymond, wants to find out how bad he really is; incredibly Raymond
is something of klutz, an awkward, unconvincing, subtly alarming stalker
of women and it takes a long time and lots of practice and failures
before providence or shall we call it accidence gives him the victim he
wants.
     In the end, Sluizer leaves only the question of how to the end.  I
would rather he had not.  The penultimate scene would have been better
left on the cutting room floor.  The film does not really answer the
question of why because it ultimately posits an arbitrary world in which
motivation is irrelevant.  Therefore, how becomes mere tidiness.
Without that the how being tidied, we would have been left with a
delicious, savory mystery, rather as we were in PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK.
     Still, the performances are uniformly fine, if not especially
showy.  The character of Raymond is the most interesting and subtly
acted; but then the devil always gets the best lines.  This particular
devil is rather funny at times with his clumsiness and endless
scribbling of notations and timings.  Sinister, of course, but also a
smug bourgeois lecturer and family man.  A man driven by mechanism you
and I can barely fathom, but also a man who spills on himself.
     I enjoyed THE VANISHING despite the weak ending and can recommend
it to anyone who isn't put off by subtitles, subtlety, no music telling
us when we're scared, or low  budgets.

Title
Review for Barton Fink (1991)
     BARTON FINK is a film directed by Joel Coen, written by Joel and
Ethan Coen.  The film stars John Turturro, John Goodman, John Mahoney,
Judy Davis, Michael Lerner.  With Jon Polito and Steve Buscemi.  Rated R
for language.
     BARTON FINK is the most puzzling movie I've seen in a long time,
which is not to say I didn't enjoy it.  I did, I enjoyed the hell out of
it.  Just don't ask me what it's about.
     I find it impossible to say anything about BARTON FINK that needs
saying without possibly giving something away.  This is a film that
amazes and surprises in virtually every scene.  So be warned:
     You've probably heard about the story and I'm not going to get into
that, except to say that Barton Fink (John Turturro) is a self-absorbed
playwright with his first hit on Broadway who gets himself co-opted by
Hollywood in 1941.  Hollywood, in this case, is personified by mogul
Jack Lipnick (Michael Lerner).  Fink is thrown into a totally unsuitable
project, a B wrestling picture for Wallace Beery.
     He lives in the Hotel Earle, which has got to be the Official Hotel
for the Twilight Zone.  The hotel is dark, hotel, vast, and populated
exclusively by Fink, a very strange bell boy/room clerk Chet (Steve
Buscemi), a superannuated elevator operator who thinks he may heard of
the Bible, and Charlie Meadows (John Goodman), Fink's next-door
neighbor, an insurance salesman with a gift for gab.
     Fink also makes the acquaintance of another studio writer,
W. P. Mayhew (John Mahoney) and Mayhew's secretary/lover, Audrey Taylor
(Judy Davis).
     If you're a Hollywood buff, you may find yourself caught up in the
roman-a-clef aspect of the script: is Fink Clifford Odets, is Mayhew
William Faulkner, Lipnick Louis B.  Mayer with a touch of Harry Cohen?
What do you do with the fact that Beery actually did make a wrestling
picture, FLESH, in 1932, directed by John Ford and reputed to be a
pretty good flick?  Time is only one of the things that are out of joint
in this film.
     Indeed, there are whole lot of facta that I have no idea what to do
with (if that's a sentence).  The disgusting, sweating, peeling
wallpaper, the fan that doesn't blow any air, the horrific murder, the
flaming corridor that no one seems to notice.  I keep returning to John
Goodman charging down that hallway with his shotgun intent on mayhem and
shouting "the life of the mind" over and over.  Is this really what
BARTON FINK is about: the life of the mind?  If so what does it say
about this?  All the characters are frauds, a third of the action may or
may not be happening to the characters in the same way it's happening to
us, the audience.  And then there's the pin-up over Barton's writing
desk who seems to end the film on the beach.  Barton says, "You're very
pretty.  Are you in the pictures?"  She says, "Don't be silly."  What?
I gasped to myself.  "Don't be silly"?  Wait, I cried, don't end the
movie now!  If the movie itself a deliberate fraud?  Do I want to hear
that?
     If you go to the movies to see wonderful performances, this is a
choice for you.  Turturro, who previously played the psychotic crybaby
in MILLER'S CROSSING, is absolutely wonderful in the weird title role,
making Fink interesting even while skewering Fink with his own ego.  And
John Goodman, sweating with a passion I've never seen from him, is
alternately boobish and horrifying and enigmatic.  Lerner as the mogul
goes far beyond the call of duty in his portrait of the degeneracy of
absolute power: a man who will do anything because he can.  The other
actors each create memorable characterizations, even as you shake your
head over each one's mystery and corruption.
     The camera work is bold, the editing tight and ingenious, the
acting and direction totally over the top.  Unfortunately, for the more
conventional movie-goer BARTON FINK displays a kind of contempt for
story-telling, dropping major story lines into the abyss of enigma.  The
Coens give no quarter and ask none.
     I recommend BARTON FINK to anyone who can tolerate a movie that
will leave him or her on his or her own, a movie that may give one
something to talk about for a long time after leaving the theater.  And
I recommend it as full price.  It's worth it.
