Authors
Vance Scott
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Tommy-lee Jones, and Will Smith star in this quirky comedy about the 
trials of Kay, and Jay two agents of the mysterious Men In Black agency. 
The concept of Men In Black is a winner, and is a ripe play ground for a 
science fiction comedy. The supporting characters come across as hollow, 
and cardboard. Although the film's weak supporting characters have more 
to do with poor writing than acting. Tommy-lee Jones, and Will Smith are 
engaging, and entertaining. The characters Kay, and Jay provide an 
excellent vehicle for Tommy-lee Jones, and Will Smith to show off their 
comedic talent. The rest of the movie was some what dull, and lacking in 
imagination. The plot focuses on Kay, and Jay's attempt to stop an 
intergalactic cockroach from capturing a minature galaxy placed in 
a gemstone located on earth. The exploits of the villain a 15 foot tall 
cockroach is largely a waste of film footage, and the audience's time. 
The villain fails to frighten, or amuse. The only thing the villain 
brings to the story is an excuse for the Men In Black to have an 
adventure. Hollywood has produced a mediocre film, a step up from this 
summer's losers. The only thing we can hope is that Hollywood will 
realize that good writing is important to a movie's success, and next 
summers movies will improve. I suspect that if screen writers started to 
get the recognition they deserve good, or bad screen plays would improve.
