Authors
Matt Lawrence
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Varsity Blues (1999)
        What makes a good football movie?  God knows it's been done
before.  I don't think there's anything left to be done.  Necessary
Roughness, North Dallas Forty, even this year's Waterboy are all
basically the same.  The only thing left to do is to make them as good
as the others.  I'm tired of seeing the final tackle in slow motion
while the team looks on in anguish.  I'm tired of hearing the dramatic
music that's a dead giveaway that someone's about to get injured.  I'm
tired of the fact that writers think that it's suspenseful to watch a
field goal being kicked with 2 seconds to go.  I'm tired of the same
stuff been done!
        In Varsity Blues, James Van Der Beek stars as Jonathan Moxon,
a second string quarterback who never gets any playing time because of
the star quarterback of a small town in Texas.  This town is obsessed
with football and treats like a second religion.  For two hours we are
treated to the adventures of Moxon who has to deal with his football
hating girlfriend, an evil legendary coach (Jon Voight) and other
teenage challenges.  And to be honest, it's a little boring.
        Why does every football movie have a really heated halftime
scene from the locker room?  Can't they express their feelings before
the game?  After?  The movie isn't that bad but don't expect to see
anything new.  Van Der Beek's accent is one of the phoniest I've ever
heard.  Voight surprisingly doesn't over-act, but the character is too
evil for a common small town.  Gee, do you think Jon Voight has been
typecast?  If Oscar night rolls around and Blues doesn't win any,
don't be surprised.
Starring: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Scott Caan, Amy Smart and
Paul Walker 
Director: Brian Robbins 
Written by: John Gatins and W. Peter Iliff
Producer: Elysa Koplovitz, Tova Laiter, Brian Robbins and Michael Tollin
http://www.varsitybluesmovie.com
