Authors
Dustin Putnam
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
Directed by Jonathan Lynn.
Cast: Matthew Perry, Bruce Willis, Amanda Peet, Natasha Henstridge, Michael 
Clarke Duncan, Rosanna Arquette, Kevin Pollak.
2000 - 99 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, brief sex, nudity, and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 19, 2000.
The characters in Jonathan Lynn's "The Whole Nine Yards," yet another in an 
endless recent string of mob comedies (1999's "Analyze This" and "Mickey Blue 
Eyes," 2000's "Gun Shy"), are rarely ever written as real people, but merely 
as one-dimensional caricatures. When an added layer to one of their 
personalities is revealed, it is not to service the character development, or 
to naturally offer up instinctive characterizations, but to accommodate the 
convoluted plot. 
In a lightweight comedy, you might say, it is not required to have perfectly 
realized figures, just as long as they get the job done. Unfortunately, for a 
comedy to work, it has to at least succeed at being funny, and if there was a 
laugh-o-meter available, I'd guess that it briefly ascended around 2.5% of 
the time for me. Suffice to say, the comedy in "The Whole Nine Yards" works 
about as well as the broken-down lawnmower in my backyard, and when a giggle 
surprisingly arises every twenty to thirty minutes, it is by sheer luck.
Nicholas "Oz" Oseransky (Matthew Perry) is an amateur dentist living in the 
quiet suburbs of Quebec. Trapped in a hateful marriage with the conniving 
Sophie (Rosanna Arquette, delightfully hamming it up with a clearly 
artificial French-Canadian accent), one day Oz sees that someone is moving 
into the house next-door. Walking over to greet him, he is horrified to 
discover it is Jimmy "The Tulip" Tudeski (Bruce Willis), a former contract 
killer for the Mafia who has just been released from prison. Once getting to 
know him and becoming his friend, Oz is more comfortable with his identity, 
but for Sophie, it means a possible hitman to do away with Oz. 
In her scheme, Sophie sends Oz to Chicago to cash in by informing his old mob 
boss (Kevin Pollak) about Jimmy's whereabouts, but in the process, he falls 
in love with Jimmy's wife, Cynthia (Natasha Henstridge), who is being held 
hostage. Upon return to Quebec, and with one contrivance after the next, Oz's 
dental assistant, Jill (Amanda Peet), is overjoyed to discover that he lives 
beside "The Tulip," and forces him to set up a meeting, since Jill's dream in 
life turns out being a contract killer herself.
Have you got all that? Because there is more. Much, much more. And this is a 
movie that, without credits, is little over 90 minutes and feels only like an 
hour. "The Whole Nine Yards" is an ultimately unsatisfying and empty-headed 
excursion into well-worn terrain already set by far superior pictures. How 
the cast, most of which are respectable actors, got caught up in such a 
cliched, deficient film remains a mystery, unless they thought it might 
aspire to match the congenial screwball zaniness of director Lynn's 1985 
comedy classic, "Clue: The Movie." Going into the theater, preliminary 
comparisons between the two movies were unavoidable, but by the twenty-minute 
mark, when I had chuckled once and laughed nary a single time, it was clear 
this production was in serious trouble.
Since the entire running time depends on the mechanisms of the plot, and the 
screenplay, inauspiciously written by Mitchell Kapner, collapses with every 
failing "comedy" bit, the film is an inevitable dead zone in the way of 
substance and, frequently, entertainment value. "The Whole Nine Yards" is 
neither facetious nor, aside from the subplot about Jill's shocking eagerness 
to become a professional hitwoman, inventive, and more often than not, just 
lies there, the film spinning drearily around and around in the projector, 
but never igniting any sort of spark.
A few select actors do what they can with the material, while others make no 
impact at all. On the mediocre side are actually those playing the two 
central characters: Matthew Perry and Bruce Willis. Perry, innocuously 
enjoyable on TV's "Friends," plays the same exact sitcom-style character in 
all of his movies (from 1997's "Fools Rush In" to 1999's "Three to Tango"), 
and it has become a crushing bore. Meanwhile, Willis makes next to no 
impression, and because of the limited guise of his Jimmy "The Tulip" 
Tudeski, oftentimes disappears into the background.
Their three female counterparts fare noticeably better. Best of all is 
Natasha Henstridge, far more radiant than in the exploitative "Species" 
movies, who adds unanticipated depth and emotion to Cynthia. Henstridge has 
the talent, for sure, to break out of these countless throwaway roles, but 
first she must fire her agent. Amanda Peet has a lot of fun as the quirkily 
straightforward and giddy Jill, and seems to know more about the art of 
comedic payoff than even Perry who, thus far, has strived on a career based 
solely on comedy. It is too bad, then, that Peet is unnecessarily asked to 
disrobe in a climactic scene, with the obvious sole purpose being to show off 
her breasts. Finally, Rosanna Arquette is awful as Sophie, but something 
tells me that was her purpose, and her clear overacting only aids in 
brightening up her limited screen time. Also popping up is Michael Clarke 
Duncan, fresh off an Oscar nomination for his role in "The Green Mile," as 
Jimmy's largely built friend and fellow killer, Frankie Figs.
When "The Whole Nine Yards" eventually sputters to its underwhelming 
conclusion, one is left pondering how such a film ever got greenlit. A great 
deal of movies of this type have been made in the past, and this one is 
nothing but a duplication of better films, so what was the point? Without a 
passable screenplay or any notable technical accomplishments, "The Whole Nine 
Yards" rests solely on the presumed charm of the cast, and half of the actors 
are not charming at all. Now, what does that tell you?

Title
Review for Hanging Up (2000)
 Directed by Diane Keaton.
 Cast: Meg Ryan, Walter Matthau, Lisa Kudrow, Diane Keaton, Adam Arkin, Jesse 
James, Cloris Leachman, Edie McClurg.
 2000 - 92 minutes
 Rated PG-13 (for profanity).
 Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 19, 2000.
 "Meg Ryan is irresistible in the comedy that celebrates sisterhood!," 
screams the television ads for "Hanging Up," disastrously written by 
real-life sisters Delia and Nora Ephron and sloppily directed by Diane 
Keaton. Make me laugh again! Not only is "Hanging Up" misadvertised, since 
the film wholeheartedly focuses on middle sister Meg Ryan and gives her two 
co-stars, Lisa Kudrow and Diane Keaton, little more than extended cameos, but 
they don't actually come together until the final ten to fifteen minutes. And 
we are supposed to believe their strong bond, and smile in the last scene 
when they rekindle their rocky relationship, despite them being apart for the 
majority of the running time? Excuse me, again, while I almost bust a gut at 
that truly delusional notion.
 Eve Marks (Meg Ryan) is the middle Mozzell sister, still living in the 
California town where she grew up, and with a husband (Adam Arkin) and 
pre-teen son (Jesse James). Her elderly, wisecracking father, Lou (Walter 
Matthau, in his brightest performance in years) has just recently been put 
into the hospital, in the final stages of what I assume is Alzheimer's (even 
though the film never enlightens us on exactly what is wrong with him). While 
Eve's relationship with her mother (Cloris Leachman) is nearly nonexistent, 
since she ran out on Lou and her children years ago, she has had her fair 
share of up's and down's with Lou, who used to be an alcoholic. Her older 
sister is Georgia (Diane Keaton), an editor for the self-titled magazine, 
"Georgia," while Maddy (Lisa Kudrow) is the youngest, a soap opera actress. 
Interestingly, their professions are given, but we not once ever see them 
working at their jobs, or, for that matter, learn much of anything about 
them. Maddy, Georgia, and Eve do not see each other much anymore, their adult 
lives gradually causing them to drift apart, but they do manage to 
consistently talk on the phone to one another. And they talk. And talk. And 
talk...
 In fact, the telephone is the major star of the film, even more so than 
Ryan, as it appears in virtually every scene of this interminable 92-minute 
catastrophe that feels like its three hours long. If you are able to get 
through the opening half-hour, in which phones ring so much you feel like 
jumping through the screen and taking a sledgehammer to them, you will surely 
survive the rest. The question is, who would want to subject themselves to 
this resolutely irritating, self-involved pat-on-the-back?
 How could a comedy-drama that has the star-power of Meg Ryan, Lisa Kudrow, 
and Diane Keaton be so very bad in so many different ways? Issues from the 
past involving the possible jealousy each has had for one of the others is 
fleetingly brought up, but the film isn't mature enough to deal with such a 
thing in a thoughtful manner, and since we learn next to nothing about their 
childhood, it is a lost cause that comes off as nothing more than an 
afterthought. Also, it is expected that the viewer quickly catch on to the 
tricky dynamic that the three sisters have with one another, but no dynamic 
metamorphosizes. And when they do reunite in the finale, their whole 
consanguinity is reduced to a repulsively annoying three-minute scene in 
which they argue like little children. You can see the impending death coming 
a mile away, and it conveniently occurs in the next scene, so that the three 
can quickly come to terms with themselves, and with each other. You think to 
yourself: "The only thing left for them to do is have a playful food-fight," 
and like clockwork, it also occurs by the end credits.
 Meg Ryan is a versatile actress (look no further than 1998's "Hurlyburly" or 
1994's "When a Man Loves a Woman"), despite her various detractors who 
stubbornly believe all she can do is romantic comedies. With "Hanging Up," 
the only thing she needs to do is completely sever her filmmaking ties with 
Nora Ephron, a writer/director/hack who shouldn't be allowed to work in 
Hollywood again after this big-budget, high-profile debacle. Even if she knew 
what she was making was not exactly up to par in the quality department, she 
nonetheless is very good, and the two scenes that work, flashbacks to 
Christmas 1988, when she had a heartbreaking run-in with her mother, and to 
Halloween 1993, when Lou crashed her son's birthday party in a drunken 
stupor, are effective because of the realism Ryan brings to the situations.
Diane Keaton, as Georgia, is better as an actress than a director here, but 
that is a wildly feeble compliment. What is more than a little far-fetched is 
that Keaton is distinctly older than Ryan and Kudrow, although in the very 
brief glimpses we get at them as children, she is no more than five years 
Ryan's senior. Yeah, right.
 Lastly, poor Lisa Kudrow has been wasted once again in a big-screen venture, 
after her even more thin role in 1999's "Analyze This." Kudrow isn't given 
enough time to create a full personality with Maddy, so it isn't her fault 
she doesn't register until a few quiet moments sprinkled throughout where she 
is actually blessed with being given dialogue. If anything, though, Kudrow is 
a real talent, and I anxiously await the next time she is given a role more 
deserving of her time, as in her brilliantly nuanced, Oscar-caliber work in 
1998's "The Opposite of Sex." If you are a fan of Kudrow's (and who isn't?), 
do yourself a favor and rent this gem that puts more good use to Kudrow in 
sixty seconds than "Hanging Up" does in its entirety.
 As Eve's hardworking husband, Adam Arkin is, predictably, squandered with a 
role that gives him next to nothing to do, until a subplot reveals itself 
midway through, only to never be mentioned again. Cloris Leachman, as with 
Ryan and Matthau, makes a small, but noticeable impression with her, albeit, 
very brief appearance, while Edie McClurg, as a rosy-cheeked woman Lou had an 
affair with in the Christmas 1988 flashback, manages one of the few laughs in 
this otherwise joyless production.
 Nearly all the emotions displayed within "Hanging Up" are patently 
manufactured, and despite the movie wanting the viewer to care about the 
characters, aside from Eve, why would you want to when they are all spoiled 
brats? If, for some bizarre, "Twilight Zone"-type of reason, you find 
yourself in a movie theater showing this film, my suggestion would be to hang 
up on it before the opening credits are over. Saying it is a waste of time is 
an understatement of epic proportions.

Title
Review for Boiler Room (2000)
Directed by Ben Younger.
Cast: Giovanni Ribisi, Vin Diesel, Nia Long, Nicky Katt, Ron Rifkin, Ben 
Affleck, Scott Caan, Jamie Kennedy, Tom Everett Scott, Taylor Nichols, Bill 
Sage.
2000 - 119 minutes
Rated R (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 20, 2000.
29-year-old director Ben Younger's "Boiler Room" has already been heavily 
touted as an all-twentysomething version of 1987's "Wall Street," and even 
1992's "Glengary Glen Ross." A morality tale about greed, corruption, and 
heartless dishonesty within a crooked stockbroking firm located way out on 
Long Island, our 19-year-old college drop-out protagonist, Seth Davis 
(Giovanni Ribisi), is not exactly what you would call an angel, either. 
Holding an illegal amateur casino outside of his home's basement in Queens, 
Seth is rolling in the dough and enjoying every second of it, until one night 
he meets gambler Greg (Nicky Katt), who makes him realize he can't waste his 
whole life doing this. 
Before long, Seth has joined Greg and a slew of other thriving young men at 
the high-pressured, cutthroat brokerage firm of J.T. Marlin. Promised by the 
firm's 27-year-old head recruiter, Jim Young (Ben Affleck), to be making a 
million dollars within the initial three years of working there, Seth begins 
to get his first real taste of the outside adult world, and starts hanging 
out with some of his coworkers, including the understanding Chris (Vin 
Diesel) and hot-tempered Richie (Scott Caan). Out of all of his new friends, 
some of which he obviously doesn't fit in with, Seth is able to open up the 
most with Abby (Nia Long), the African-American receptionist who has decided 
to stay at the all-white firm because of her own generous paychecks, which 
help her to take care of her ill mother. It doesn't take too much time for 
Seth to realize that the employees of J.T. Marlin are fraudulent stockbrokers 
who knowingly are taking the money of innocent, potential clients, and the 
worse thing is, Seth discovers he is turning out just like them.
Littered with a soundtrack of rap music in a motion picture made up almost 
entirely of white males, but which adds an unexpected edge to certain 
memorable moments, "Boiler Room" is a drama about a group of people who are 
rotten to the core, without any qualms about being deceitful and uncaring, 
just as long as they are making some quick bucks; and a few select souls who 
are the conscious of the film--people who may also do things wrong within the 
course of the picture, but who are able to at least recognize their mistakes. 
Equipped with a superfluous editing style that would be more at home on MTV 
or in a relatively innocent comedy like 1999's "Detroit Rock City," sticks 
out like a sore thumb here. With flashy jump-cuts and shots that purposefully 
match the music, editor Chris Peppe does his job professionally but it was 
unwise for director Younger to decide on such a distracting approach.
"Boiler Room" takes place in a savagely cold environment, but the film is not 
without its dramatic character moments for Seth, particularly in the scenes 
with his unflaggingly disapproving and stern father (Ron Rifkin). Oddly, 
then, one of the film's major pitfalls is its resolutely sterile emotions. 
Even when we are supposed to invest our interest in Seth, as well as his 
relationships with his father and Abby, the whole movie has a strangely 
detached feeling to it, and while a few of the performances are top-notch 
(okay, only Ben Affleck's cockily assured multimillionaire has the ability to 
grab you by the throat every time he appears), the rest of the cast and 
writer-director Younger never seem to fully have their hearts in the material.
As the undoubted central character of Seth, Giovanni Ribisi is an offbeat 
performer without the Hollywood-style good looks or leading-man potential, 
but who does his job respectably. Best in his less demanding moments, Ribisi 
ultimately does not, however, pull off the emotional breakdown sequence with 
his father, which feels like it's right out of Acting 101. The fresh 
appearance of Nia Long, as Abby, is appreciated, but she is generally 
underutilized, and the romantic subplot that is sparked between Seth and she 
has not an ounce of chemistry or passion, nor is it even necessary or come 
with a satisfying payoff.
But the disappointing wrap-up of their relationship is apparently only in 
staying with the rest of the film. "Boiler Room" had enough of my rooting 
attention to get a marginal pass from me throughout its running time, but the 
finale, to put it mildly, is a bust. Setting itself up for so very much more 
than actually is present, not only is the character arc of Seth predictable, 
but the way all of the elements around him are dealt with is an unconvincing 
cop-out, leaving you in the theater commenting to yourself: "I just dedicated 
two hours of my life to a movie that led up to that?" Filmmaker Ben Younger 
set out to make a thought-provoking rumination on the power of money and the 
people it affects, but all he really has done is made a motion picture that, 
for all of its potential, never breaks away from being merely skin-deep.
