Authors
Steve Basile
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Basketball Diaries, The (1995)
[Note: This film premiered at the South By Southwest Film Festival, Austin 
Texas, on Monday, 13 March, 1995.  It opens in wide release this Friday,
21 April.  Some minor SPOILERS follow.]
     "You just got to see that junk is just another nine-to-five gig in
the end, only the hours are a bit more inclined toward shadows...."
     With these words, Jim Carroll wraps up a reading from his diaries,
the same diaries for which this new film, starring Leonardo DiCaprio is
named.  With these words we are led to believe he is, for the time
being anyway, redeemed, saved from the torments of addiction, and
worse.
     The movie may be a bit too neatly tied-up at times, but its story
is compelling, engaging and emotionally draining.  Ultimately, we enjoy
the same sort of thrill watching this film as we might get from reading
anyone's secret diary, more so as a result of this diarist's fluid
prose and stark, street-smart poetic insight.
     DiCaprio delivers a wonderful performance as Jim Carroll,
"Catholic Boy" gone bad, taking us on a poet's journey through a boy's
life: high-school round ball, tentative sexual encounters, hanging out
with the "wrong friends," and dabbling with a progression of drugs,
crime, death and eventual redemption.
     As in past roles, (What's Eating Gilbert Grape, This Boy's Life)
DiCaprio immerses himself to the point of disappearance in his role,
seemingly *becoming* Carroll, to the point that the real Jim Carroll
(who appears in a ghostly, skeletal cameo) appears a caricature of
himself.
     We want to *like* Jim, who seems to have so much going for him in
the early stages of the film.  He has a good, if overly disciplined
education, athletic ability, boyish good looks and friends who seem to
care.  We are worried when he begins to experiment with Carbona, and
glue, then with progressively harder drugs, and feel ourselves sinking
with him as his downfall progresses.
     Mark ("Don't Call Me Marky-Mark") Wahlberg vindicates himself
admirably, in an effective and unassuming portrayal of Carroll's friend
Mickey, showing little of the punk/rap bravado that early naysayers
were certain would mar his performance.  Lorraine Bracco is convincing
and inspires real sympathy as Carroll's mother, torn between her desire
to provide for her son and her worst fears that he is slipping away.
     But this is DiCaprio's film, and his remarkable transformation
into a dark and scheming junkie out for the next high is profound and
staggering.  Scenes with Ernie Hudson, his older, wiser and
street-toughened basketball rival, as Carroll attempts to ride out "the
cure" cold turkey are gruesome to watch, and filmed in quick snippets
of freeze-framed emotion, betraying director Kalvert's music video
past.  Elsewhere, his emotional reaction to the death of his best
friend is moving and real, and the twisted jubilance that follows
strangely jarring, yet coherent.
     The film is far from perfect, with musical set pieces a bit
jarring at times, especially when the real Jim Carroll's pop tunes from
the early 80's are introduced.  Some time settings are off (NY's Times
Square is only now undergoing the renovations seen in the film; at the
time in which the book was set it was as seedy and decaying as ever).
For some, the too-neat ending might smack of "deus ex machina" in its
too-tidy wrap-up of a decidedly untidy life.
     But these are small nits to pick.  Overall, this film presents a
richly woven swatch of a fabric many of us never feel, of life on the
streets seen through the eyes of one who can really tell us about it,
make us feel it, make us hurt. Visually slick, morally ambiguous,
possessed of a truly engaging tour guide, The Basketball Diaries is a
cinematic trip to a place most of us rarely visit, but will benefit
from having seen.
