Authors
Jeff Frentzen
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sindrome di Stendhal, La (1996)
Here is a review of Dario Argento's latest movie, taken from the Dark
Waters web site. 
Dark Waters is the
intelligent journal for people interested in little-known horror,
science-fiction, and fantasy movies; including banned, sick, obscure,
"psychotic" (and so-called psychotronic) films that were never released,
barely released, or released and then suppressed.
Long time fans of Italian director Dario Argento's work are already
recoiling at THE STENDAHL SYNDROME. This extremely dark and brutal film
does not behave like the police procedurals or giallos of Argento's
past; nor does it proceed like the horror movie it is advertised to be.
It is, rather, a deliberately paced and studied chronicle of a woman's
psychological destruction at the hands of a severely disturbed,
modern-day sicko.  Assistant Inspector Anna Manni (Asia Argento), part
of an anti-rape task force in Rome, blindly follows a tip that a nasty
serial rapist/killer will show up at the Uffizi art museum in Florence.
Wandering the gallery and contemplating the great works of art, she
falls victim to the Stendahl syndrome, a real condition that amounts to
a physical and emotional shutdown as a result of sensory overload. She
collapses and suffers from temporary amnesia. This is when she is
approached by the killer, Alfredo.  Anna and Alfredo embark on a deadly
relationship of hate and violence, in which she is possessed by him
physically and psychologically.  Her experiences are so profound that
even when Alfredo is killed, he "lives on" in her.  THE STENDAHL
SYNDROME is one of Italian director Dario Argento's most surrealistic
works.  The opening 15 minutes, which play without any dialogue,
culminates in an extraordinary sequence of Anna halluncinating and
"entering" one of the paintings in the gallery.  Likewise, the movie
finds Argento between two worlds -- One, the depressingly prosaic
storytelling landscape that screenwriter Argento populates with
unimaginative cop characters and brutal killers; and the other, more
interesting panorama in which Argento the visual stylist can create
iconoclastic, horrific imagery.  Superficially, THE STENDAHL SYNDROME
is inspired by his TENEBRAE (aka UNSANE), which also offered a
protagonist who investigates but eventually takes part in a murder
spree. Unlike TENEBRAE, however, there is no facile denouement to
unravel whodunit and why.  Anna's transformation from an innocent to
murderess is an abstraction that Argento does not let us understand, or
cannot understand himself. It simply is, as though her long-buried
madness is simply brought to conscious life by Alfredo.  In addition,
the movie's clinical approach subjects the viewer to four ghastly rape
scenes that document Alfredo's consummate depravity.  Moreso here than
in any other Argento film, characters are defined by set design and an
outstanding use of color. Conspicuously named real locations -- such as
Rome and Florence -- reinforce the film's more subtle horrors, in which
Alfredo is able to move effortlessly in public and continue his
murderous activities without being noticed. He and Anna blend
frighteningly well into their surroundings. But when Anna starts
wearing a blonde wig to hide a facial scar, she is suddenly, jarringly
different, mock glamourous and at odds with her environment. The change
conveys her deep psychological suffering without having to explain
every nuance of why she is that way.  Technically, THE STENDAHL
SYNDROME is well made, with outstanding Giuseppe Rotunno cinematography
and a haunting music score by Ennio Morricone.  Argento's script
suffers from too much banal dialog; the characters' attitudes and
speech fit with the movie's overall attempt to portray everyday
realism, but little of what they say is compelling or delivered
smartly. As Anna, Asia Argento underplays the part and is strangely
uninvolving. Thomas Kretschmann makes a believable serial killer, but
the rest of the cast is seriously damaged by some annoying English
dubbing.
                   Jeff Frentzen
