Authors
Martin Urch
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Apocalypse Now (1979)
     Far much more than just another war movie, Francis Ford Coppola's
stunning reworking of Joseph Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS is one of the
ultimate cinematic experiences.  Boldly transferring the story from
1930s' Africa to late 1960s' Vietnam, Coppola give us a bizarre and
hallucinatory vision of the madness of war.
     There are stunning visuals, from the opening technicolour
explosions to the final climax at a ritual sacrifice.  Sound is also
used to full effect, as we hear the throbbing of the helicopters
filling the Dolby Surround soundtrack.  Coppola makes what some would
consider an unusual choice by using The Doors' "The End" to bookend the
film, but it works so well you may be surprised to find it wasn't
written for the scenes.
     Martin Sheen gives a complex performance as Lieutenant Willard,
which dominates the film until the final half hour when Marlon Brando's
intense, sometimes incoherent Colonel Kurtz takes over the picture and
leads it in an entirely different direction.  Although some critics
have blasted the bloated Brando's portrayal of the monster that is
Kurtz, this could be the actor's last great role.
     Packed with memorable moments, such a helicopter blade blurring
into an overhead fan in a cloud of marijuana smoke, this is a film you
will want to see again and again.  Despite not being to every one's
taste, Apocalypse Now should stand as a testament to the skill of the
director and the leading players.
All comments to M.Harding@bath.ac.uk will be passed on to the author.
