Authors
Jonathan E Myers
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     I was looking forward to CONGO.  I had read the book a couple of
years ago and liked it.  I figured that there was a decent chance of
someone turning it into a good action-thriller movie.  I was wrong.  I
turned out to be the worst movie that I've seen this year.
     CONGO is the story of a giant corporation that sets out on a
desperate search for some unique diamonds located in the remotest
regions of the Congo.  These diamonds are the key to the future for
this company so when the first expedition is mysteriously wiped out, a
new expedition is immediately dispatched.
     The new expedition constists of a Romanian philanthropist, a
primate Ph.D., his talking gorilla, a research assistant, a
communications Ph.D. (the leader), and the African guide.  This group
treks into the Congo to retrieve the diamonds and find out what
happened to the other expedition.
     The special effects were pretty good except for the cheesy ape
costume.  The acting was terrible.  None of the actors seem like they
are doing anything besides walking around and speaking their lines like
they just read them off a page for the first time.
     The screenplay was terrible.  There is absolutely no character
development.  I did not care about the characters at all.  I don't
expect much from an action movie, but this had none.  The plot was
entirely unbelievable.  I can suspend my disbelief a couple of times
per movie, but this one was just too much.  Personally, I wish that I
had not seen this movie.  It was not worth the time or money.  See it
at your own risk.
