Authors
Ann Tschirgi (Ann Tschirgi)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
     THE NET had a plot that was average.  The previews gave it all
away.  Angela Bennet's identity gets deleted.  Now I am not one to say
this is no big deal or that this is not creative but I do agree that
this movie dealt with the plot in a pitiful way.  She just *happens* to
have no friends so *nobody* can agree that there was a actual Angela
Bennet.  And there is a sub-plot about a back-door to a security
program and a diskette that would be good enough on its own for a
plot.  But combine the two together and you get a rushed movie.  The
basic parts about Angela running away are similar to The Fugitive and
make up a large portion of the movie.  Also THE NET was a mis-leading
title as the film had little to do with the Internet besides having
Angela send a few files and being on an unrealistic chat program.
     Sandra Bullock does as good of a job that can be expected for a
role in a movie that requires someone to have a "Why me?" expression on
her face joined with screaming "I am Angela Bennet!!"  The actor that
plays the villain is excellent however.  He is charming yet evil
similar to Lex Luthor on the TV show "Lois + Clark: The New Adventures
Of Superman."  Some other roles pull off bad jobs like the actress who
plays the lady who becomes the "new" Angela who just acts like she
hates acting and Angela's mother who has Alzheimer's and seems like she
is deaf and an idiot.
     THE NET has very little special effects.  But what it does have is
average fare.  Like chase scenes and explosions.  The death of the
villain is done in a fake way that makes Angela Bennet seem like
Superwoman.
     This movie is just above average from its acting.  Good to see if
no other good movies are out or if you like Sandra Bullock.  Oddly
enough I found this movie to be a comedy....
