Authors
Scott Eggimann
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Flight of the Intruder (1990)
     Are movie audiences willing to pay good money for something they
can watch on the nightly news?  If the movie's lack of success in its
early weeks is any indication, FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER has already
crashed and burned.
     The movie is based fairly accurately on Steven Coonts' novel of the
same name.  If you read the book, you might not want to see the movie,
or at least be ready for disappointment.  The movie follows the book
until just about the end, and then things change dramatically.  If you
haven't read the book, do yourself a favor; it's much better than the
movie.
     Lieutenant Jake "Cool Hand" Grafton (Brad Johnson) follows the
footsteps of all the classic heroes.  So what is the problem with Jake
(or is it Johnson)?  He never seems to live up to the super hero image
he was portrayed to be in the book.  I kept wanting to accept him as the
hero, but this never happened.  If Johnson had more of a domineering
personality (like Tom Cruise in TOP GUN, for example), then Jake might
live up to he the hero the movie wants him to be.
     Danny Glover plays the tough Flight Commander, Frank Camparelli,
although he too is hard to accept as a character in a serious role.  In
my opinion, the only strong performance in this movie comes from Willem
Dafoe as Virgil Cole, Jake's renegade bombardier.  Dafoe seems to cast
himself into the Vietnam-era movies, perhaps contributing in part to
his success in this film.
     One disappointing part of the movie is that few moments are devoted
to the A-6A Intruder's breathtaking takeoffs and landings from the deck
of the aircraft carrier.  Despite the fact that the movie was actually
filmed on an aircaft carrier, this enormous resource was never
exploited.
     FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER is second in a generation of high-tech
thrillers.  The first being Tom Clancy's HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER
(ironically, by the same producers).  Consequently, it is not too
surprising that FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER suffers the same technical
misgivings that the Hunt for Red October had: the aphrodisiac that
pulls readers to Coonts' and Clancy's books is the great attention to
detail.  Coonts painfully describes evading a surface-to-air missile
(SAM) (from Page 6 of FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER):
     "There's the SAM!  Two o'clock!  Jake fought back the urge to
     urinate.  Both men watched the white rocket exhaust while
     Grafton squeezed the chafe-release button on the right
     throttle with his forefinger.  Each push released a small
     plastic container into the slipstream where it dispersed a
     cloud of metallic fibers--the chaff--that would echo radar
     energy and form a false target on the enemy operator's radar
     screen.  The pilot carefully nudged the stick foreword and
     dropped to 200 feet above the ground.  He jabbed the chaff
     button four more times in quick succession..."
     The movie shows us this high tension scene in five seconds.  There
is no explanation to what is actually happening.  I found myself running
home to read the book again to satisfy the questions the movie left
unanswered.
     The movie plays with two subplots and I'm not sure if they really
belong in the film.  In the book they play a more important role in
breathing life into the characters, in the movie they simply get in the
way.  Jake's relationship with Callie (Rosanna Arquette) seems
superficial and unimportant (where in the book Callie plays a pivotal
role in saving Jake's sanity) and the "Mad Shitter" never really lives
up to the suspense it could have been.
     The success of the techno-thriller novel is that a reader can fly
an A-6A Intruder just by reading along.  The movie fails on this level.
Maybe I simply expected too much from a good book?

Title
Review for Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991)
          Capsule Review:  An exciting, captivating adventure film about
     the classic story of Robin Hood and his quest to fight evil and
     return justice to the poor people of England.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4);
     Worth the full admission price.
     Many years have passed since I first read the story of Robin Hood
and his band of merry men.  Since then, the closest I've come to the
story has been through Walt Disney's animated version.  The story I
remember is a childhood fantasy depicting the epic battle of good versus
evil and the current movie holds onto that theme.  This movie is not
getting good reviews, and I'm not sure why.
     Having a small background in European history during the Crusades
certainly enhances the numerous references to that period, but it is not
necessary for understanding and enjoyment.
     Robin of Locksley (Kevin Costner) certainly follows all the steps
of the classic hero.  He goes off to fight with King Richard in his
quest to convert the barbarians to Christianity.  His decent to the
underworld is where we first see him.  Robin is a prisoner in a Turkish
prison.  His successful escape brings with him the Moor Azeem (Morgan
Freedman) -- a little irony here, his enemy in the Crusades.
     In the first ten minutes of the film, Robin is firmly established
as a hero (in the literary sense).  With this type of introduction, I
was prepared for either a big let down or a continuation of this
theme.  I was not let down, Robin actually makes several symbolic trips
to the underworld to turn this movie into an exciting adventure story.
     The relationship between Robin and Azeem is a perfect union.  Robin
is a representative of the allegedly "civilized" English people and
Azeem is a representative of the so called "barbarians."  Ironically it
is Azeem who shows the barbaric nature of the English people during King
Richard's reign.  Their relationship shows that two enemies can combine
to fight a common foe; once in Turkey and again in England.  The two
learn from each other and provide the spark to lead other men to a cause
greater than anything either of them had faced before.
     Beautiful breathtaking scenes permeate this movie.  One image is of
Robin's father exiting his castle dressed in his black battle armor on
top his black steed preparing to battle the overwhelming mob in front of
him (reminiscent of the suicide scene in the beginning of DANCES WITH
WOLVES, that Costner had just completed filming).
     Humor is rampant through the movie.  I was not prepared for the
Sheriff of Nottingham.  He is actually a very funny person, his facial
expressions and comments are very comical.  Once you accept that he can
be a funny person and laugh at his humor, he becomes a much more
enjoyable character.  The Sheriff is a complex character who you can
never quite figure out.
     Leave your expectations at home about some of the more memorable
stories of Robin Hood:  I don't quite remember the whole story I read,
but I don't remember any mentions of the Crusades, and I definitely
don't remember the Moor Azeem.  Robin says he's robbing from the rich
and giving to the poor, but you don't really get to seem him giving away
all that much.   I guess the story had to be updated for a new
generation.  If this is the case, then I liked the updating.
     One more thing...  How come Robin did not have an English accent
while everybody else did?  I suppose an English actor or a language
instructor for Costner would have made the small details of this movie
more entertaining.
     I left the theater wondering if the situation were reversed, if
Robin would have followed Akeem to Azeem's homeland for saving his life.
I think he would have.  The successful relationship of the two is so
strong that I could accept the reversal of situations.  This isn't a
one sided relationship, both friends learn from each other.  Since these
two play such an important role in the success of the movie, we must be
able to believe they are sincere.

Title
Review for Once Around (1991)
          Capsule review: A well-done movie about relationships and
     fitting in.  A movie that makes you think about relationships,
     love, life, death, family change, and just about every other
     human emotion.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4); worth the full price to
     see.
     Richard Dreyfus and Holly Hunter reunite again as lovers.  Their
last meeting was in the 1989 hit ALWAYS.  These two have a chemistry
between them that lets us get carried up in their love for each other.
These two are fun to watch together; Dreyfus always seems to be running
around out of control while Hunter in contrast, seems to be calm and in
control of her life.  We never doubt their feelings for each other.
     Sam Sharpe (Richard Dreyfus) plays a successful condo salesman who
never really fits into the Bella family.  Although he tries, he never
grasps when to leave well enough alone.  Dreyfus as the stereotypical
salesman, interacts so well with everyone in the cast, everyone is
effected by him.  Whether positively or negatively, he does effect
everyone in the movie.  As the family's feelings toward Sam changed, my
feelings changed with them.  Is this the director conveying these
feelings to me or is it Dreyfus?  I think that it's Dreyfus as an actor.
     And what is it about Holly Hunter that is so appealing?  Hunter is
so captivating that one wants to jump up into the movie and hug her.
Hunter plays Renata Bella, the youngest daughter to Joe (Danny Aiello)
and [I cannot remember her first name] (Gena Rowlands) Bella.  Renata's
life is in a state of disarray when we meet her.  She's looking for a
career and her longtime lover fails to commit to her.  We cannot but
help to feel sorry for her.
     The action between Joe and Sam is what makes this movie funny.  Two
strong-willed men fighting for control of the family and ultimately
Renata.  The friction between them is fueled by the fact that both men
are both very eccentric.  Each has their strange and sometimes humorous
ethnic customs that they strictly follow, even when circumstances do not
permit the continuance of the outdated custom.  In fact the funniest
parts of this film are the two men acting out their customs, and the
others ability to deal with the annoyance.
     The satisfying part of the movie is we get to see everyone change.
After all, it is change that is the only constant in life, we'd better
deal with it somehow.  Although the Bella family is slow and somewhat
reluctant to change, the strength of the family unity is tested and
ultimately strong enough to withstand the highly eccentric Sam.
Ironically, it is Sam who does the least amount of changing.
     A strong theme throughout this movie (more strongly in the
beginning than in the end) is that you can never return home.  Renata
returns home after she breaks up with her first lover.  The problems
begin when she brings Sam home.  I always liked Sam, after all he is
trying to please everybody; he doesn't have a bad bone in his body.  I
had a problem with the Bella's hesitation to accept Sam, and Renata's
happiness.
     The movie did seem to drag on for a while in the middle, probably
because of lack of a plot.  Overall I enjoyed the movie, and I would
probably see it again.  I couldn't help but compare Joe and Sam to
Archie Bunker and Mike in "All in the Family".  On many levels Joe and
Archie are very similar; they both have eccentric habits and are
reluctant to accept their daughter's lover; Sam and Mike keep on living
uneffected by their father-in-law's actions and they don't seem to care
what is thought about them.  Joe is no Archie Bunker though, in the end
Joe realizes his daughter's happiness and accepts Sam for who he is.
