Authors
Merch
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Casino (1995)
   CASINO (1995) is one of those rare movies where everything falls
wonderfully into place.  The script is magnificent, with nary a weak point
in sight.  The story follows the rise and fall of two gangsters, played to
perfection by Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci as they leave their mid-western
gambling roots and literally "take over" Las Vegas.  One tries to take the
high road by running the Tangiers Hotel and Casino (De Niro), while the
other (Pesci) takes the low road, becoming one of the most feared (and
sought-after) men in the city.  Both try to please the bosses "back home",
to varying degrees of success.  Marty Scorsese turns in a wonderful job of
directing, and will be forever credited for taking Sharon Stone (who plays
Ginger, the coke-head alcoholic wife) from the terrible material she has
had post-"Basic Instinct" to her Golden Globe win for Best Actress and her
subsequent Oscar nomination for this part.  The musical score is peppered
with over 30 songs from the 70's and 80's, which serve in many cases as
narratives (i.e. after Stone and De Niro have a falling out, "I'm Sorry"
plays).  CASINO is a well done film, and will please many groups of
people: fans of the actors (Stone has an especially showy part), lovers of
the genre (gangster films), and those who appreciate wonderful atmosphere
(you at some points would really swear that this was really filmed during
the era it portrays).  
   CASINO is rated R for brief nudity (none, surprisingly, done by Sharon
Stone), heavy language, and some very graphic violence.  It has a running
time of 179 minutes, and also stars Don Rickles, James Woods, Alan King,
and Kevin Pollak (A Few Good Men).  
