Authors
Leo Bueno
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
     The plot: Young model meets retired judge who enjoys snooping on
other people's private telephone conversation; they become friends,
sort of.
     This is the story of the "relationship" between a young woman and
an older man.  She is a fashion model and a student; he is a
disillusioned older man.  She has a full life; he doesn't.  She is
physically attractive; he walks with a limp.  She wants love; he lost
love.  Her lover is at the end of a telephone line; his lover is a bad
memory.
     No, they don't climb under the sheets, but there is more than
friendship between them.  Maybe this movie is nothing more than a
delicate twist on WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  Can a man and a woman be just
friends?  Can an old person romantically love a young person?  Why
shouldn't an old weird guy and a naive pretty young girl love each
other?
     If you are expecting lucid insights into this film, forget it;  I
am neither smart nor sophisticated enough to understand its
subtleties.  This often happens to me with European and particularly
French movies (which this one is, in part).  Maybe it was because I did
not see the other two legs of the trilogy, WHITE and BLUE, but having
read other folk's reviews, I am convinced that this movie stood on its
own.  Go see it, even if you didn't see the other two.
     I wondered out loud throughout the film, as I left the movie house,
and for a couple of days thereafter: "What's the point; what's the
point of this movie?"  Nobody got shot, nobody got chased and almost
nobody got laid.  These quintessential elements of Hollywood cinema
were conspicuously absent from this film; no wonder I could not figure
it out.  There was no great moral dilemma to resolve, no difficult
choice to make, no fight to be waged.  Yet, there is something
appealing about this movie.
     The characters seemed like people you have at some point known, or
want to meet.  The acting was superb.  Perhaps because the actors are
unfamiliar, one gets that "it doesn't look like they are acting"
feeling.  Yet, the plot is artificial enough for one to realize this
is, after all, fiction.
     One senses the ingredients for an offbeat romance are present, but
it isn't clear why the director didn't throw them in the pot and light
the fire.  Perhaps this movie is in essence a delicate romantic
cliffhanger; the characters get close to the edge, but don't take the
overt plunge.  You will wonder why.

Title
Review for Todos los hombres sois iguales (1994)
     Spanish cinema has fallen in a groove, a nice groove; YOU MEN ARE
ALL THE SAME (a.k.a., TODOS LOS HOMBRES SOIS IGUALES) is a fine
example of it.  The general framework is that of refreshingly witty
dialogue (in the context of slightly improbable situations) which
envelops pathetic aspects of the characters' lives.  One suspects that
the production companies which assemble these films are a little short
on cash, however, they are long on skill and talent.
     YOU MEN follows along the path carved by BELLE EPOQUE, AY
CARMELA!, WHY DO THEY CALL IT LOVE WHEN THEY MEAN SEX (same director as
YOU MEN), JAMON JAMON, and probably a few others which I did not get
around to seeing (note in this list the absence of Almodovar's films,
which I generally find much ballyhooed, greatly overrated, and
gratuitously shocking).  Spanish filmmaking of late is in part a
response to the change in the country's political climate.
     Thank God Francisco Franco died, so Spanish cinema could shake the
old and tired little Joselito and Sara Montiel didactic musicals and
produce movies which show life as it probably is.  Yes, Generalisimo,
wherever you happen to be, men and women do break one of the
Commandments on a regular basis with each other.
     One not necessarily disquieting aspect of the style (at least from
this reviewer's politically incorrect male perspective) seems to be the
casting of at least two great looking women, one of whom at some point
in the film bears her boobs.  Franco must be twirling in his royal
grave.  Unfortunately, sometimes Spanish directors throw in scenes
whose shock value far outweigh their aesthetic merit.  In YOU MEN,
there is a shot of one of the protagonists missing his urinary
porcelain mark; it crossed the artistic necessity line; it brought
memories of Almodovar's unwarranted depiction of a woman in a similar
situation, albeit with much better aim.
     YOU MEN is the story of three recently divorced thirty something
men--a pilot, a sports broadcaster, and an architect--who share an
apartment.  Less than adequate domestic skills compel them to hire a
non-resident housekeeper.  She is a shapely and beautiful young woman,
driven by single motherhood into this less than ideal and unbecoming
profession.  The movie chronicles the relationships among the men,
their ex-wives, their children, and the housekeeper.
     One may simplistically characterize this movie as a twist on THREE
MEN AND A BABY; it would be unfair; it is not so.  This film is not
concerned with the mechanics of the men's new domestic lives; it deals
with their emotions during a difficult part of their existence.  This
movie is not about juggling roommates, household utensils, and living
spaces; it is about managing the aftermath of divorce, and its pain.
The only drawback to the movie is that some of the comedy is a little
too physical; not quite Jerry Lewis material, but a bit too harsh for
its other fine elements.
     The relationship between the men and their ex-wives encompasses
the post-dissolution of marriage spectrum.  One can't stay away from
the ex-wife (and she obliges sexually); one grins, bears and tolerates
her antics; one even attempts physical violence against the ex-wife's
business establishment.
     Although the title implies a feminine perspective, YOU MEN's
director is a man.  He (sometimes through trite sketches and themes:
wife running away with lawyer; men at party huddling to watch sports
videos; man gawking at bent-over woman) portrays men as lusting
romantic bumbling idiots; however, he subtly paints women as cunning
calculating mean-spirited predators, on balance, much less favorably.
     The scene you will remember from this film will not make you
laugh.  You will remember the pilot's son's incontinence, brought on by
the parents' ugly bickering.  There is pain and suffering in divorce;
there is no honest cinematic way to soften the harshness of its
effect.

Title
Review for Fresa y chocolate (1993)
     I am starting to write this review before going to see STRAWBERRY
AND CHOCOLATE, Cuba's Oscar nominee for best foreign film, directed by
Tomas Gutierrez Alea (who also directed the sometimes and in some
circles critically acclaimed MEMORIAS DEL SUBDESARROLLO--"Memories of
Underdevelopment".  I saw MEMORIAS as part of a Cuban cinema class back
in the late '70s; it merged the politics of the Cuban Revolution with
mundane elements of the human condition.  I knew then that MEMORIAS was
probably a state-sanctioned political missive, and now expect
STRAWBERRY will follow suit.
     Fellow Internetters, primarily in the newsgroup dedicated to Cuba
(soc.culture.cuba), have mentioned that STRAWBERRY is a harsh criticism
of the Revolution and its current state of affairs.  I have jumped to
the conclusion that STRAWBERRY is nothing more than a veiled attempt at
espousing the party line--it probably looks like political criticism,
but it ain't so.
     Having some first hand and extensive anecdotal knowledge of
Castro's repressiveness, I can't conceive of his tolerating honest and
adversarial criticism of the Revolution, and I can't imagine his
letting anyone even suggest his failure as a leader of a failed
movement.  As kids say these days, duh!, the Revolution's current state
needs no criticism; its physical and spiritual crumbling is self
evident.
     The proper questions to put relate to Castro's legitimacy.  I bet
the film takes Castro's power for granted, and that this or any other
movie, produced under Cuba's state control, cannot question his right
to run Cuba's political show (ongoing now for more than 36 years).
That's why I just can't believe STRAWBERRY is an honest criticism of
the regime.  Let's see what happens after the room goes dark and the
screen lights up.
     I saw the film--twice.  I was right; Castro remained intact.
     STRAWBERRY negotiates the relationship between a young "dialectic
materialist,"  as he describes himself, and a homosexual photographer
(Diego) in 1979 Cuba.  The young man (David) is the son of peasants; a
symbol of the Revolution's reason for being.  Grateful to the
Revolution for the opportunity to receive a university education, he
studies Political Science instead of Literature, his avocation, because
he perceives it is his duty.  Therein lies a likely unintended irony,
since Cuba has no need for political theoreticians.  Cuba's government
is Castro.
     Diego's lifestyle is the antithesis of Revolutionary life.  He
enjoys the finer things--tea, opera, art.  He does not do "voluntary
work" for the Revolution.  His small apartment is a sensual oasis.  The
moniker "bourgeois" figuratively hangs over his head during the early
parts of the movie.  However, he is a "Revolucionario" in his own way.
     The supporting roles are filled by: an aging busybody with a heart
of gold and a troubled psyche; David's roommate, who rally takes the
Communist Party line to its expected extreme; David's ex-girlfriend,
who dumped him for another guy, yet wants to bed him before she leaves
for Italy with her husband; German, a gay sculptor whose work Diego is
attempting to exhibit, and who strikes a Faustian pact with the
government.
     Gutierrez Alea and co-director Juan Carlos Tabio do a fine job at
almost showing that homosexuals can be revolutionaries too.  Heck,
towards the end of the film you begin to think the guy deserves a medal
for his patriotic fervor.  He really loves the Revolution (as
supposedly does everybody else in Cuba) and wants to make it better by
exposing and correcting some of its flaws.
     Real criticism is missing though.  This movie is political window
dressing.  Luis Aguilar Leon's op. ed. piece on FRESA in THE MIAMI
HERALD (10 March 1995, at 21A) did not color my judgment; it presaged
my intuition.  Aguilar Leon expressed my sentiment about this film's
political angle best:
         Like many artistic manifestations in Cuba, STRAWBERRY AND
    CHOCOLATE sprang from a totally manipulated environment.  As art
    critic Ivan De La Nuez well states in the latest issue of the
    magazine POSTMODERN NOTES, the silenced artists are those who
    refuse to accept "the charade in which artists can provoke up to a
    point, while the institutions legitimize themselves by forbidding
    them to go beyond that point."
     Although terrible propaganda, this is otherwise a fine film.
