Authors
Mark Shapiro
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Stargate (1994)
All ratings are on a scale of 1 (bad) to 10 (good)
     Though this movie took bits and pieces from other movies/shows, it
put a unique twist into the plot.  The design, in terms of continuity
and plot, was somewhat lacking, but I give it an 8 because I can't
quite say what should have been changed.  Effects and authenticity both
get a 10.  Effects because of the costume design and "scientific"
phenomena.  Authenticity because of how well it stuck to ancient
Egyptian culture and beliefs.  One key contributing aspect giving it a
score of 10 was the languages.  In many movies, (STAR TREK rings a bell
or twelve) everyone speaks the same language.  Even cultures that are
newly found speak English.  When the characters met the other culture
in this far away world, they did not know how to communicate.  It was
not until the geek professor realized they were speaking a language
similar to an ancient Egyptian dialect (Which was realistic considering
the background of the culture), he was able to communicate.  Until
then, not only were they unable to communicate, but we the viewers were
not able to know what they were saying--no subtitles!  For the greater
part of the movie, we were only given what the Earthmen were given.
Language, sights, etc. were limited to what the characters could hear,
see, etc.  Overall, an *excellent* movie, well worth the ticket price,
and one I intend to get as soon as it's available on videotape or in
.MPG format.  
