Authors
Subrata Sircar
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
          Capsule Review:  Arnold Schwarzenegger returns to modern-day
     LA from 2029 as a Terminator assigned to protect John Connor against
     another Terminator with advanced mimetic powers.  Linda Hamilton
     turns in an excellent performance, but the actors play second fiddle
     to awesome special effects.  Rating:  8+ [1 to 10 scale].
     Arnie is back as a Terminator, only this time he's a generation
behind in technology.  The new T-1000 series Terminators are made of
mimetic metal, and can take on any form with the same mass, able to form
any solid metal object.  The new Terminator takes out a police officer
and assumes his form to hunt John Connor, while Arnie appears nude near
a biker bar.  Some nasty mayhem later, he's got clothes, boots, a
shotgun, a Harley and the all-important  shades.  The two machines find
John at nearly the same time, and battle it out through the mall,
several roads, and a few trucks, with Arnie finally saving John.
     In the last few years, things have not gone so well for Sarah
Connor.  She has been shacking up with anyone who could teach her and
her son about combat and survival, and eventually went over the edge and
attacked a computer factory.  She's been locked up in a mental
institution for a few years, while John Connor has been turning into a
juvenile delinquent with foster parents.
     So of course, Terminator and John go to bust Sarah out, minutes
ahead of the evil Terminator ....
     The movie also seems to be the last Terminator flick, as there was
a good effort to wrap up all the loose ends from both movies.  The first
movie pointed out the alternate reason for sending a Terminator to the
past the first time; his remains were needed for the cybernetic
breakthrough which triggered Armageddon.  This time, all remains of all
three Terminators are incinerated, and the movie ends on a somewhat
positive note, implying that the future the Terminators came from is no
longer inevitable.
     Overall, this movie was just as good as the original, which is an
amazing accomplishment.  There are two science-fiction gimmicks; time
travel and mimetic metal.  Get past those and the rest is one hell of an
action movie.  Usually, when watching a science-fiction movie, I tend to
think of six  different ways the villains could use their powers to end
the movie somewhere after the first half hour; not so this time.  The
mimetic Terminator uses his abilities very intelligently, especially in
combat; reforming around bullets, sliding through grills, reforming
around Arnie's hand when he punches him, etc.  About the only trick he
missed was abandoning the human form altogether and going to the octopus
mode for combat, but overall the evil Terminator was right on the money.
     Linda Hamilton plays Sarah Connor as a woman driven by the specter
of global annihilation; she has a recurring dream of the world ending,
destroying all the children in a playground.  She is not quite sane, and
has become  determined to prevent the holocaust by any means necessary,
including the sacrifice of other lives as well as her own.  I kept
seeing Sarah Connor as someone who was alternately trying to be a mother
and a soldier, never sure which one was right, knowing which one was
practical.
     I won't attempt to describe the special effects, except to say that
Industrial Light and Magic did themselves proud.  The evil Terminator
looked convincing and very very menacing.  Lots and lots of explosions,
gunfire and mayhem, and all of it was spectacular.  The opening scene
was wonderful, as were the two knock-down drag-out fights between
Terminators.
     In short, I loved this movie.  Great special effects, a good
performance by Linda Hamilton, and some excellent science-fiction to mix
into a truly excellent Arnie action film.  You'll like this, and it will
make back its $100 million (rumored) budget.
