Authors
Mike Cameron
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Director: Joel Coen
Writers: Joel and Ethan Coen
Starring: Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, David Huddleston, Julianne Moore,
Steve Buscemi, Peter Stormare, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Tara Reid, Flea,
John Turturro, David Thewlis, Ben Gazzara, Sam Elliott.
    It seems, perhaps out of what is, by now at least,a force of habit, that
people have a tendency to define a generation, or more aptly, an era by
decades.  Baby Boomers: The 60's.  The Disco Era: The 70's.  GenX/Cheesy Pop
Synth Music/British New Wave Era: The 80's, also refered to as the me
decade.  So, we are now in the 90's, which will be over in a few years, and
what will call this decade?  So far, we have a generation defined of this
era, Slackers.
    Now, this is not to say that the Cohen boys are Slackers by any means.
They have created some of the most entertaining films of the past 10+ years,
and achieved world-wide fame and glory, public and critical success and
praise with "Fargo."  Their follow-up "The Big Lebowski" is more closely
related to their previous efforts, "Raising Arizona" and "The Hudsucker
Proxy."  What they present is a somewhat dis-jointed collection of oddball
characters that drift in and out of a losely structured film.
    The lead character, one Jeff Lebowski, is a jobless, slightly shiftless
layabout, meandoring through life in LA in the early 1990's, who prefers to
be called The Dude.  He is mistaken one fateful evening by some low rent
thugs for another Jeff Lebowski, The Big Lebowski (David Huddleston) who's
wife has apparently ran up quite a tab with a local pornographer.  To drive
home their point, they urinate on his rug.  He then goes to the home The Big
Lebowski looking for compensation, is refuted, scams a rug from The Big
Lebowski's assistant (Phillip Seymour Hoffman), meets the wife in question,
Bunny (Tara Reid) and her drunken nihilist boyfriend (Peter Stormare) on his
way out.
    This leads the way for The Dude's involvment kidnap scheme involving
Bunny, that is alot more complicated than it should be, at least when The
Dude's friend/bowling partner Walter (John Goodman) becomes involved.  What
follows are the introduction of many weird characters, including Julianne
Moore as Maude, The Big Lebowski's estranged avant-gaurde artist daughter,
who has more than a passing interest in The Dude, Steve Buscemi as Donnie,
the third partner in The Dude's bowling leauge, who is contantly having
trouble keeping up with conversations and being to shut up and Ben Gazzara
and the pornographer who may or may not have had Bunny abducted.  These
characters, along with hilarious cameos by John Turturro as a bowling
pedophile named Jesus, Sam Elliot as The Stranger, who pops-up, as well as
narrarates the story,  intermittently, and Daved Thewlis as a John
Waters-esque friend of Maude.
    All of these characters, along with the abuse suffered by The Dude's
car, make the plot inconsquental by comparison.  In fact, what appears to
the main plot, Bunny's kidnapping, is wrapped in such a lazy "Aha!  So the
real cuprit is..." fashion, that it's almost ant-climatic when it is
revealed.  But again, the plot takes a back seat to the characters and what
the movie is really about.
    And what is that?  Well, take a look in the time period in which the
movie is set.  I believe that the Cohen's choose the early 90's for a
specific reason.  We were coming out one already pre-defined decade and into
a new, shapeless era.  The Slackers were taking over, and the Baby Boomers
were following their lead.  We were a people, much like The Dude, with no
driving force behind us, since no one had yet to tell us what were or what
we going to be.   Coming out of The Me Decade, we just didn't care about too
much else except that me factor, and although political correctness hadn't
quite taken over, we could see it was on it was way, well, we had better
take it easy while we could.  Even the "plot" , with it's lazy, generic
"twist," seems as if it was pulled right out of a late 80's/early 90's tv
Perry Mason movie.
    So, the Cohen brothers take look at our culture, makes fun of
it/us/themelves, and manage to make a highlt entertainingmovie all at the
same time.  Because even if you don't "get it," they've managed to put
enough off-the-wall scenarios to al least keep you wondering excatly what
they are going to come up with next.  I mean, after all, excalty how long
can that car last, anyway?

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Director: Joel Coen
Writers: Joel and Ethan Coen
Starring: Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, David Huddleston, Julianne Moore,
Steve Buscemi, Peter Stormare, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Tara Reid, Flea,
John Turturro, David Thewlis, Ben Gazzara, Sam Elliott.
    It seems, perhaps out of what is, by now at least,a force of habit, that
people have a tendency to define a generation, or more aptly, an era by
decades.  Baby Boomers: The 60's.  The Disco Era: The 70's.  GenX/Cheesy Pop
Synth Music/British New Wave Era: The 80's, also refered to as the me
decade.  So, we are now in the 90's, which will be over in a few years, and
what will call this decade?  So far, we have a generation defined of this
era, Slackers.
    Now, this is not to say that the Cohen boys are Slackers by any means.
They have created some of the most entertaining films of the past 10+ years,
and achieved world-wide fame and glory, public and critical success and
praise with "Fargo."  Their follow-up "The Big Lebowski" is more closely
related to their previous efforts, "Raising Arizona" and "The Hudsucker
Proxy."  What they present is a somewhat dis-jointed collection of oddball
characters that drift in and out of a losely structured film.
    The lead character, one Jeff Lebowski, is a jobless, slightly shiftless
layabout, meandoring through life in LA in the early 1990's, who prefers to
be called The Dude.  He is mistaken one fateful evening by some low rent
thugs for another Jeff Lebowski, The Big Lebowski (David Huddleston) who's
wife has apparently ran up quite a tab with a local pornographer.  To drive
home their point, they urinate on his rug.  He then goes to the home The Big
Lebowski looking for compensation, is refuted, scams a rug from The Big
Lebowski's assistant (Phillip Seymour Hoffman), meets the wife in question,
Bunny (Tara Reid) and her drunken nihilist boyfriend (Peter Stormare) on his
way out.
    This leads the way for The Dude's involvment kidnap scheme involving
Bunny, that is alot more complicated than it should be, at least when The
Dude's friend/bowling partner Walter (John Goodman) becomes involved.  What
follows are the introduction of many weird characters, including Julianne
Moore as Maude, The Big Lebowski's estranged avant-gaurde artist daughter,
who has more than a passing interest in The Dude, Steve Buscemi as Donnie,
the third partner in The Dude's bowling leauge, who is contantly having
trouble keeping up with conversations and being to shut up and Ben Gazzara
and the pornographer who may or may not have had Bunny abducted.  These
characters, along with hilarious cameos by John Turturro as a bowling
pedophile named Jesus, Sam Elliot as The Stranger, who pops-up, as well as
narrarates the story,  intermittently, and Daved Thewlis as a John
Waters-esque friend of Maude.
    All of these characters, along with the abuse suffered by The Dude's
car, make the plot inconsquental by comparison.  In fact, what appears to
the main plot, Bunny's kidnapping, is wrapped in such a lazy "Aha!  So the
real cuprit is..." fashion, that it's almost ant-climatic when it is
revealed.  But again, the plot takes a back seat to the characters and what
the movie is really about.
    And what is that?  Well, take a look in the time period in which the
movie is set.  I believe that the Cohen's choose the early 90's for a
specific reason.  We were coming out one already pre-defined decade and into
a new, shapeless era.  The Slackers were taking over, and the Baby Boomers
were following their lead.  We were a people, much like The Dude, with no
driving force behind us, since no one had yet to tell us what were or what
we going to be.   Coming out of The Me Decade, we just didn't care about too
much else except that me factor, and although political correctness hadn't
quite taken over, we could see it was on it was way, well, we had better
take it easy while we could.  Even the "plot" , with it's lazy, generic
"twist," seems as if it was pulled right out of a late 80's/early 90's tv
Perry Mason movie.
    So, the Cohen brothers take look at our culture, makes fun of
it/us/themelves, and manage to make a highlt entertainingmovie all at the
same time.  Because even if you don't "get it," they've managed to put
enough off-the-wall scenarios to al least keep you wondering excatly what
they are going to come up with next.  I mean, after all, excalty how long
can that car last, anyway?
