Authors
Rob Reser
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
Before you jump on me too harshly for 'liking' this movie let me just
explain a few things. I have seen them all. Every major (and almost
every minor) schlock horror movie you can think of. I have seen; all of
the Kruegers, all of the Jasons, every holiday killer out there, every
scary fable come to life (I am especially waiting for a sequel to
RUMPLESTILTSKIN). I love cheese. The cheesier the better.  Cheesy,
pulpy, schlocky, and, most of all, bloody horror movies are extremely
entertaining to me. Mostly because I can make fun of the characters,
their stupidity, the unlikliness of their situations, the poor judgement
of the victims, the insane way the killer wastes the stupid students,
and, above all, the unwillingness of the killer to expire at the end.
Its FUN! I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER falls right in the middle of
this genre. This movie fits under the sub heading of 'Killer with a
grudge takes out everyone who had anything to do with original incident'
(PROM NIGHT, TERROR TRAIN, MY BLOODY VALENTINE). I give extra marks to
this film for finding a holiday that hadn't previously been chosen (to
the best of my knowledge) - The Fourth of July. Do I really need to tell
you what this movie is about? I don't think so. It is formula to the
end. But is also a lot of fun. It takes place in a small fishing village
fraught with plenty of sharp hooks and gutting instruments. Need I say
more? I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER isn't innovative like SCREAM but
it is fun for anyone who misses the days of the summer camp killers. 2 ˝
spots (out of 4)
Favorite Line: Helens boyfriend: "You know I'm terrified of your
superior I.Q."

Title
Review for Kolya (1996)
 Franta Louka has his hands and life full with his mother's
deteriorating house, his lack of money, and simply just trying to make
ends meet. Once a famed cellist in Soviet-occupied Czechoslovakia's
philharmonic orchestra, Louka (played by Zdenek Sverak) is now forced to
play at funerals and gain extra cash by painting tombstones. Director
Jan Sverak paints a wonderful portrait of a grumpy bachelor who can't
seem to catch up on his debts. Not wanting to let his badgering mother
find out what he has been doing to keep up with the constant monetary
demands, Louka reluctantly decides to engage in some illegal activities
that end up filling his plate with much more than he can handle. Louka
ultimately finds himself in the awkward position of caring for a small
boy that he neither wants nor needs to have around. Fear of getting
himself jailed, however, forces him to keep the boy and make do with the
situation. Andrej Chalimon playes the adorable Kolja who makes the
screen sparkle with every moment that he is on it. The movie follows the
unlikely pair as they both make important realizations about themselves.
Entertaining from start to finish KOLYA is an incredible offering from
the Czech Republic.  Academy Award and Golden Globes winner for Best
Foreign Language Film.3 ˝ spots (out of 4) 

Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
Poor Mike. But haven't we all been there at one point or time? SWINGERS
is a 'life in the week of....' movie and a great one at that. Mike (Jon
Favreau) has broken up with his girlfriend and moved to California to
'attempt' to make it as a comedian. His friends are extremely concerned
about his well being, however, since he can only obsess over his loss.
Checking his answering machine hourly and at very inconvenient times in
hopes of hearing her voice he practically refuses to leave his
apartment. The guys, however, are there to remedy the situation. In a
series of "nights out" Mike is thrust back into the singles scene again
and finding that it is much more difficult than he remembers. Trent
(Vince Vaughn) is the king of the swingers, though, being able to say
the right thing at the right time even though it looks like the wrong
thing at the wrong time. His knack at picking up women is unconventional
but always right on the "money". The entire gang spends their time
trying to boost Mike's horribly low self-esteem by coaching him in the
ways of women and by dragging him through California and Las Vegas
nightlife. The movie feel is that of just hanging out with a group of
guys who exist to have a good time and hit on the "babies". The script
is extremely well written and dialog is snappy and hysterical. Director
Doug Liman (whose only previous credit is 1994's GETTING IN) does an
acceptable job of pacing the film and pulling out the 'real-life' feel
and look from the actors. A discussion of good/bad Hollywood directors
amongst the guys even leads to a couple of homage scenes that are well
placed and enjoyable. SWINGERS soundtrack is well suited adding a
jazzy-swing flavor to the picture that only adds to the already exciting
ambiance. Feel like a good laugh and a look at the way guys think today?
You don't want to miss SWINGERS then. 3 ˝ spots. (Out of 4)
Favorite line: The whole bunny/bear conversation

Title
Review for Basquiat (1996)
Writer/Director: Julian Schnabel
Stars: Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, David Bowie, Dennis Hopper, Gary
Oldman, Christopher Walken, Willem Dafoe, Parker Posey, Courtney Love
and Tatum O'Neal.
        First time Writer/Director Julian Schnabel uses film as his
canvas to paint the portrait of Jean Michel Basquiat. JMB (played
elegantly by Jeffrey Wright) is an enigmatic individual who is never
fully explained. Coming from a fairly stable and supportive home-life we
never truly know why Basquiat decides to spend his nights in a cardboard
box at the films opening. A struggling "vandalistic" artist, Basquiat
moves through the streets with an uncaring and self-destructive
attitude. He fends for his daily meals by scrounging what he can and
ultimately stops wherever he feels like it to use any materials he has
on hand to express his feelings on walls, signs, and delicatessen
tables. Basquiat travels, much like Schnabel's camera work, aimlessly
from encounter to encounter sprawling his eclectic prose across
buildings and alleys as he goes. After impressing a small time waitress
by painting her portrait in syrup on the restaurant table, Basquiat
starts a relationship with the beautiful Gina Cardinale (played by Clair
Forlani).  Gina, herself, wants to be an artist and her works are
scattered throughout her meager apartment. Basquiat, who is so lost in
his own quest to alter all that is out of place, wakes up early one
morning to scribble all over her art and paint across one of her nicer
dresses. It is this kind of attitude that follows Basquiat throughout
the entire movie. He only answers to himself and fails to compromise his
integrity, or at least what he mistakes as such, by lashing out against
anyone and anything that doesn't see his vision. David Bowie does an
incredible job portraying Andy Warhol, the most notorious of "pop"
artists. In an early scene Basquiat interrupts a lunch Warhol is having
with his agent, Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) to try and pawn off
some of his post-card size scribblings at ten bucks a pop. It is evident
that Basquiat is only motivated by his own means and when his works
begin to gain notoriety, the fame never really changes him. His attitude
is unwavering and he is completely unconcerned with who he angers,
antagonizes, lies to or dicks over along the way. The only thing that
his growing fame and increasing income affords him is the ability to
paint more and to take even more drugs. One of the biggest debates we
had after the movie was whether or not John Michel Basquiat (based on
the workds portrayed in the film) was actually artistic or simply a scam
artist. I believe he was an extremely talented individual who lived on a
higher plain than most other artists. In a scene where Christopher
Walken was interviewing him on his new found success and meaning of his
works, Basquiat was able to show us a little of how he thinks when he
draws. To me this served to show that his talent was out of the normal
scope of what most consider "art", which is what made his paintings so
remarkable. John Michel Basquiat was not a nice person, nor someone who
had any real feelings for anyone other than himself and his mother. He
did, however,  develop an interesting relationship with Andy Warhol, but
even that was a peculiar one. Basquiat's relationship with his mother
was never really revealed though we know that she was locked away in a
mental institution and that he made regular visits to see her. He even
attempted to rescue her from that place late in the film but was so
destructive to himself and out of control by then that he never managed
to help her. BASQUIAT is an incredible journey through the underground
art world and showcases an all star cast. Decidedly depressing and
visually out of sync, BASQUIAT triggers many emotions and succeeds in
all of it's endeavors to let us follow the obusive actions of a man
whose visions are only known to himself.  4 spots (out of 4)
Favorite Line: Andy Warhol - "I can't tell what's good anymore."

Title
Review for Career Girls (1997)
         Director/Writer Mike Leigh (SECRETS AND LIES) brings us another
candid into the ordinary lives of ordinary people. This time we get a
look at two women who once roomed together in a London flat during
college. The film starts 6 years later when Annie (Lynda Steadman)
arrives to meet here old flat mate Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge of BREAKING
THE WAVES) whom she hasn't seen since graduation. The movie follows the
two women over a day and half since Annie has only a short time for her
visit. We meet the girls through a series of flashbacks and through
their encounters in their search to find Hannah a new place to live.
Bumping into familiar faces along the way we seem to piece the lives of
these two women together almost as much as they do on their journey.
Starting off awkwardly unsure of how to react to each other and ending
by being closer than they had ever been. The dialect is heavy and hard
to get used to at first but by the time the girls go apartment hunting I
found myself drawn into their mysterious past. Coincidence abounds and
sometimes feels preconceived but it's not too hard to believe that these
two women might just have that kind of luck.Jumping through many
emotional hoops along the way CAREER GIRLS is a mesmerizing glimpse into
Mike Leigh's characters. Katrin Cartlidge is especially wonderful in her
role bouncing quickly between sarcasm and sincerety. 2 ˝ spots (out of
4)
Favorite Line: Hannah looking out an 8th story window over the city; "I
guess this is where you watch the class struggle from."   
