Authors
David Zanetti
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Chicken (1996)
  New Zealand films have always been a bit unusual.  Sometimes that
unusualness creates something special - NEVER SAY DIE, GOODBYE PORK PIE,
and ONCE WERE WARRIORS.  Sometimes that unusualness, mixed with
Hollywood-style scripts (complete with unlicensed guns and car chases),
just doesn't quite work which is the case with CHICKEN. 
  Take one seventies pop icon, add a few wrinkles, years and failed
comebacks and we have Serrento, who'll take any job to pay the bills, or
another shot at his lost fame.  In this case it happens to be an
advertisement for "Chik N Lik".  As part of the gig he's got to actually
turn up to the new store and serve customers.  Along for the opening are a
number of protesters, dismayed at the treatment of chickens (and other
animals). 
  Add one slightly disturbed individual (who lives with chickens) intent
on destroying the chicken-serving (and therefore murdering) Serrento, one
bodyguard who happens to be at the new store when trouble strikes, and a
daughter who's looking for her long-lost mother.  While you're at it add
in Serrento's manager and his son, and a plan to revive Serrento's lost
stardom by faking his death. 
  The problem this film strikes is none of this actually seems to fit New 
Zealand, and the whole daughter-seeking-her-past subplot is buried and is 
thrown away in an epilogue.  The humour, while at times is there, seems to 
play secondary to the 'action'.  Unfortunately neither comes off that well. 
Those action sequences are hampered by the telegraphing of the plot to 
the audience, and the sheer lack of bang in them.
  For those familiar with New Zealand actors you'll see a few familiar
faces here, my favourite appearance (although short) being that of John
Leigh, aka Lionel Skeggins from the New Zealand television soap SHORTLAND
STREET.  At times however, it plays like a who's-who of current New
Zealand cinema and television. We'll forgive it for that, there are just
not that many professional movie/television actors around here worth
mentioning. Those that do appear to offer support do so pretty well. 
  All in all, CHICKEN is a film I doubt will be seen outside New Zealand
and Australia, but it might show up in a collection of films from the land
of the long white cloud. For a much better Hollywood-script-in-New-Zealand
film try NEVER SAY DIE, featuring Temuera Morrison (before his stint in
SHORTLAND STREET) in his film debut. Well worth digging out! 
Rating (-4 to +4): 0 for NZ, -2 for the rest of the world.
