Authors
Scott Fisher
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mad Dog and Glory (1993)
     Let's get one thing straight up front.  MAD DOG AND GLORY is NOT a
drama.  When I rented it on video tape, the store had put it in the
Drama section (as has the Internet Movie Database).  I'm not sure it's
a comedy though.  Deconstructionist satire might be a way to describe
it.  Its charm comes from breaking expectations--showing life in an
unflattering, unexpected, and humorous way.
     Superficially, the plot seems as though it belongs to a
traditional romantic comedy--THE BUTCHER'S WIFE, or WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING, for example.  Wayne (DeNiro), a middle-aged cop, intervenes
in a convenience store robbery, saving mob boss (Murray) being held at
gun point.  The next day, Wayne receives an invitation to a party at a
local comedy club.  Frank, the mob boss that Wayne saved, turns out to
own the club.  He does stand-up comedy there for all his mob friends.
In gratitude for saving his life, Frank sends Glory (Thurman) to live
with Wayne for a week to "make him happy."  At first Wayne tries to
ignore Glory, but they eventually fall in love--Wayne no longer wants
to give Glory back after the week is over.  The conflict between
Wayne's love for Glory and the fear of defying Frank form the basic
conflict.
     After the summary, you might wonder why MAD DOG AND GLORY is any
different than any romantic comedy.
     First, consider that Bill Murray plays a mob boss while DeNiro
takes the part of a cop.  DeNiro usually plays the famous gangster.
Second, DeNiro is not heroic (in any traditional sense).  He's scared
witless in the robbery in which he saves Frank's life.  A
non-aggressive cop?  When was the last time you saw that in a movie?
     The list of shattered expectations goes on and on: the sex scene,
instead of being glamorous, is downright awkward and humorous.  The mob
boss, has a sensitive and insecure side (he talks about his
psychologist constantly), instead of being the powerful and threatening
person portrayed in most movies.  Though the script keeps foreshadowing
the death of DeNiro's partner, he never dies.  Almost every time you
expect something to happen, something different occurs instead.
     After reading a few reviews of the movie at the Internet Movie
Database, I was amazed that people took it so seriously.  Many
apparently took it at face value--as a drama.  The humor was deadpan
and sometimes subtle--the kind of thing you'd expect if David Byrne and
Woody Allen made a movie together.  Still, I'd think that most people
would pick up on it.  Then again, I know some people who took _Spinal
Tap_ at face value, as a "rockumentary."  Maybe some awareness of movie
conventions and stereotypes is necessary to enjoy this movie.
     I loved this movie, and though it had its share of problems, it's
one of the best movies I've seen in the last year.  Though rough around
the edges, this thinking person's comedy brings something lively to the
screen.  If you want to watch something tired and homogenized, look
elsewhere.  MAD DOG AND GLORY's sense of comedic adventure make this
movie a very entertaining experience.
