Authors
Ryan Ellis
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Chinatown (1974)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        "Chinatown" is one of those movies that you'd be better off
watching in black and white to get that real film noir
experience. Representing the very best in the tradition of film
noir, this classic was honoured by the American Film Institute
when they released their "100 Years, 100 Movies" list. It placed
#19 on that list, which ranked even higher than the Oscar-winning
"The Godfather Part II" of 1974 (which placed #32). "Chinatown"
is so layered, so well acted, so superbly written that it can be
watched many times and something different just might be noticed
with each viewing. Robert Towne's original screenplay (the only
Oscar this movie won) could be put in a vault, removed in 90
years, and it would STILL be among the sharpest ever written.
        The 11-time Oscar-nominated Jack Nicholson stars in this
picture about a monopoly over the California water supply during
a severe drought in the '30s. Nicholson plays Private
Investigator J.J. Gittes (a.k.a. Jake), a smooth-talking
slimeball who usually works on exposing marital infidelities to
unfortunate spouses. He occasionally apologizes for his foul
mouth and wears a fedora like nobody's business.
        After a hypnotic, saxophone-dominated credit roll, the film
begins in Gittes' office where Jake explains to a client (Burt
Young, Paulie of "Rocky" fame) that his wife has been two-timing
him. Right away it's obvious that Gittes is a puzzling
character--he's not a worthless rodent, but he's certainly not
your average "good guy" either. Gittes simply wants to make some
dollars. As he says, "L.A.'s a small town. I just want to make a
living." As the film progresses, we discover that Gittes has a
sordid past when we worked as a police detective in Chinatown
with his arch-rival, Lou Escobar (Perry Lopez). The story leads
to the final confrontation between the major players in Chinatown
where a helpless Gittes confronts some demons. But that's jumping
ahead.
        The investigator is visited by the infamous Mrs. Mulwray,
who claims her husband, Hollis, has been messing around and she
wants proof. He stumbles onto something much bigger than a simple
infidelity. Gittes follows Mr. Mulwray everywhere until he
discovers that the man turned up drowned. He's confused when he
is later confronted by the REAL Mrs. Evelyn Mulwray (breathlessly
played by the beautiful Faye Dunaway). She wants him to find out
who murdered her husband. Gittes snoops around in more places
than he should and discovers that the water monopoly is a giant
conspiracy led by Hollis' partner and Evelyn's father, Noah Cross
(played by Nicholson's mentor, John Huston).
        In one of the most famous scenes in cinema history, Gittes'
nose is slit by a thug (director Roman Polanski) trying to deter
him from snooping. To protect his damaged proboscis, Nicholson
wears quite a distracting prop--a huge, white nose bandage.
Nicholson wore the prop for a realistic period of time to allow
such an injury to heal. Ironically, he plays a terribly vain
character in "Batman" (as Jack Napier before he becomes The
Joker), who wouldn't be caught dead in such a get-up. But that
shows the diversity of the 3-time Oscar-winner.
        Later, after sleeping with Mrs. Mulwray, getting beaten up
by two more thugs, totalling his car, and suffering through two
or three more plot twists, Gittes discovers that the phony Mrs.
Mulwray was a pawn hired by the sinister Cross. And, hold onto
your hats, Evelyn has a daughter who is also her sister,
Catherine. How could that be? Well, Cross was a naughty boy...
Actually, he's one of the best villains in Hollywood history. A
great director, Huston is also a fine actor. So, when Gittes
finally learns the truth, he helps Evelyn and Catherine escape
from the vile clutches of Cross, who wants Catherine--"the only
daughter I have left". That leads to the explosive night in
Chinatown. I won't reveal the ending, save for the immortal final
line, "Forget it, Jake. It's Chinatown".
        Nicholson's smarminess and questioning grimaces reveal a
great deal about his character and ignite what could have been
slow and boring scenes. For instance, Gittes tries to light a
cigarette while explaining the conspiracy to Evelyn. He fails to
get the thing lit after several tries. He shrugs and gives up.
This looks like it was a failed scene where the lighter was
defective, but Polanski kept it because it works so well. After
all, when things are falling apart in this man's life, why should
a cigarette co-operate? Jack's "it figures" reaction is rather
funny, too.
        One of Polanski's gifts is the good sense to let the camera
linger on his actors and allow for a scene to develop without
constant dialogue. That technique hardly works these days and no
one seems patient enough to try it. Too many directors are
"cut-happy" and don't want to let their actors act. However,
Polanski was lucky enough to employ superstars like Nicholson and
Dunaway.
        The film shows the racist, sexist, and often cruel attitudes
of the economically-ravaged '30s. Gittes is not a hero, but he's
one of the more complicated characters ever portrayed on the big
screen. Perhaps this film also works so well because of the
smoldering sexual chemistry between the two leads. Contrast those
heated scenes with the macho exchanges between Nicholson and his
surrogate father Huston. This is as smart a film as you'll see
where nothing is as simple as it seems.
        As for Jack, he plays his ultimate tortured character.
Unlike The Joker or Jack Torrance, Jake Gittes is a complex
introvert. He says little and doesn't get to ride off in any
sunsets with the girl. Unfortunately, he didn't win his first
Oscar until the following year in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's
Nest", his fifth nomination. He's my favourite actor and he might
still win a 4th Academy Award to establish a record for male
actors.
        "Chinatown" is a four-star groundbreaker filled with
superior dialogue and plot twists that might easily confuse the
casual observer. You've got to pay attention to this layered
story because the pay-off is tremendous. Polanski and the
producers did everything correctly, right down to the detailed
period set design and the score by the great Jerry Goldsmith.
This is the very best film noir movie ever shot. Watch it again
and inhale a masterpiece because they don't make 'em like this
anymore.
USELESS TRIVIA--Jack Nicholson has been nominated for a male
record of 11 Oscars, 7 lead, 4 supporting. They are (capitals for
Oscar wins): Easy Rider, Five Easy Pieces, The Last Detail,
Chinatown, ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, Reds, TERMS OF
ENDEARMENT, Prizzi's Honor, Ironweed, A Few Good Men, and AS GOOD
AS IT GETS.
This film receives a 10/10.
It also ranks #37 on My 100 Favourite Films list


Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        Steven Spielberg is a busy man. He's got a lot to worry
about with his leadership of 'Dreamworks SKG' and concurrently
trying to find scripts that appeal to the artist inside him.
Fortunately, a man with his kind of stroke in Hollywood can take
producing credit on some lesser projects and then direct his
personal favourites. Only his 6th directing effort of the '90s,
"Saving Private Ryan" is his most brutal, and perhaps most
honest, film.
        Like Spielberg's 1993 masterpiece, "Schindler's List", this
picture has historic significance. People can study "Saving
Private Ryan" and actually learn something about the horrors of
World War II. Now, don't assume that "study" means that young
kids should see this. They certainly should NOT see it because
the violence is so brutally frightening. What happens to the men
in this picture makes the violence in most action films look even
MORE cartoonish than usual. This is blood and guts at its
stripped-down core.
        And gore may have never been shown on the silver screen like
this. Even stupid slasher flicks haven't shown this much
diversity in how to kill people. The now-famous first 25 minutes
of "Saving Private Ryan" is the D-Day invasion on Omaha Beach.
The Allied Forces storm the beach to take it from the Germans by
sending in the ground troops to break down the defences. Before
many of the young men ever get off the boats, they're shot like
sittin' ducks. Using a great deal of hand-held camera shots and
terrific make-up, Spielberg shows men loosing limbs, internal
organs, heads, and obviously their lives throughout the bloody
invasion. As the bodies pile up and the audience grip their
arm-rests, the troops surge forward to "take the beach".
Ultimately successful in their primary objective, but faced with
massive loss of lives, the armed forces do what you do in war
when bad stuff happens--move on.        
        So, having said that, the movie would not have worked if the
main characters were not likable. And who's more likable on the
big screen than Tom Hanks? The two-time Oscar-winner is as close
to a modern-day Jimmy Stewart as we have. Heck, I'd follow Tom
Hanks into war. Nominated for another Academy Award as Captain
John Miller, Hanks leads a platoon of 7 other men into the heart
of a war-torn Europe. Their mission--and they have no choice but
to accept it--is to find the youngest son of a mother who has
already lost his 3 older brothers. They have orders to bring him
out so he can go home.
        On the surface, it's a simple story and one that COULD end
when they find Private Ryan (Matt Damon). A poor movie would end
with the trumpets blaring and the credits rolling when the entire
platoon stumbles victoriously into friendly territory with the
young fella. This film is better than that. It dares to give us a
reason to believe in their mission of endangering 8 lives for the
life of 1. You believe in their mission by the time the final
guns go off and just have to love these fightin' men. A part of
you dies when they die. Well, not ALL of them end up dead, but
let's be honest--even if you haven't seen the film--they're not
all coming out alive. After all, this is war and war is hell.
        Young Ryan responds in perhaps the most honest and
honourable way he could when the platoon find him--he refuses to
leave because he feels obligated to stay and defend a bridge with
his new "brothers", his squadron. The climactic battle with the
heavily fortified Germans is almost as messy as the D-Day
invasion. The out-manned Americans fight gallantly, but this
final battle rivals the one on Omaha Beach in terms of bloodshed.
        It's strange that one of the hottest actors on the planet,
Matt Damon, is not the star of this show (even if he IS the title
character). He is appropriately cast as the boy they're trying to
save. You feel the same way the platoon does when they first see
him--all the bellyaching about the mission is easily forgettable
when you put a face to the name. The chief "bellyacher" is Reiben
(Edward Burns). Playing the wisecracking' kid from Brooklyn,
Burns looked to be a good bet to receive an Oscar nomination.
Since he didn't, he can take something far more valuable from
this film--as a young director, he got to work with the immortal
Spielberg. Tom Sizemore, who plays loyal Sgt. Horvath, could have
been an Oscar-finalist, too, since he so epitomized the
toughness, grit, and sincerity of the group. Also, Jeremy Davies,
the green corporal brought along to translate, is like a small
child caught in a mansized nightmare. He's very good in his role,
as well.
        In all, "Saving Private Ryan" was nominated for 11 Academy
Awards, ranging from sound to art direction to score (John
Williams, alas) to the phenomenal make-up. However, it didn't get
the nod for Visual Effects and that's just not right. All those
bullets and explosions and hideous deaths were worthy of some
recognition. So, if the Academy won't do it, then I'll recognize
it here--the terrific special effects were award-worthy because
they were helpful to the story, rather than BEING the story.
        Spielberg has now shown the Jewish side and the American
side of WWII. It will be interesting to see if he takes a big
risk and tackles a project that shows the German, Japanese, or
even the Russian side of that war. If he does, he could be in
line for a third Best Director Oscar (provided he wins this year,
of course).
        This is only the second movie I've ever seen twice in a
theatre and it's good enough to be seen again. When I walked out
of the cinema the first time last summer, I said "there's your
Oscar winner right there". I stand by that quote even today,
despite the wonderful rivalry that should develop between "Saving
Private Ryan" and "Shakespeare In Love". Both films are worthy in
this two-horse race, but the great Steven Spielberg deserves a
2nd Best Director Oscar. I believe he'll win it for this film.
USELESS TRIVIA--If Tom Hanks wins his 3rd Oscar, he would become
the first actor to ever win 3 awards in a leading role (all of
them in just 6 years!).
This film receives a 10/10.
It also ranks #74 on My 100 Favourite Films list.


Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
What's to like about the world of extremely violent trash
pornography--ie. the garbage known as "snuff" films? Nothing,
right? What's to like about a film chronicling the world of
violent trash pornography? Well...nothing. So, why make it,
Hollywood? There's no reason why the average, sane movie-goer
will be interested in such a topic. No one is going to enrich
their life or have a good time by watching material such as this.
The lack of quality filmmaking in "8MM" (from technical to
acting) stands out even more when you consider the star, writer,
and supporting cast--all reputable. But Joel Schumacher and his
brand of unlikable filmmaking strikes again! Like Paul Schrader,
Schumacher has his moments, but they're few and far (FAR!)
between. Basically, this picture is crap and NO ONE should pay to
see it. Why not walk out? Well, this wouldn't be a thorough
review about a thoroughly bad movie. Here's why you should spend
your money on dog food or gum instead of "8MM"...
First thing--if you don't heed my advice, then understand what
you're about to see before you even THINK about paying good money
for this crud. It's not easy to watch. I didn't know the details
of the story beforehand, but at least my ignorance can help
others now. The (HA!) plot revolves around Tom Welles (Nicolas
Cage) as a surveillance expert and Private Investigator. A rich
old woman discovers a "snuff" film in her late husband's safe.
She calls Welles and hires him to try and find out if the young
girl (it had to be a young girl, didn't it, Schumacher!) who
appears to be murdered in the film really is dead. She's
horrified that her husband would have owned such a film (in 8mm,
of course) and just wants Welles to snoop around without police
interference to see what he can find. Family-man Welles agrees
against better judgement or any concrete leads even after
cringing and grimacing at the sight of the grotesque "murder".
Let me backtrack for a moment. See, "snuff" films are pornos with
a violent twist--people are tortured in very sick ways and end up
dead. However, the deaths are often staged and, in those cases,
special effects and "good" acting make all the difference. Very
sick people enjoy and pay top dollar for these hard-to-find
movies. The thought of this "industry" makes me want to throw my
computer out the window and stop this review, but I'll swallow my
bile and move on.
Welles follows clues to Hollywood and the porn industry. You'd
think he's Sherlock Holmes the way clues drop so easily for him!
He comes across smut clerk Max (Joaquin Phoenix) who knows
everyone and everything in the underground business of sleaze.
After a lot of digging and bribing, Welles finds the men who are
responsible for making this, and other, "snuff" films. Skip
ahead, skip ahead, skip ahead... Led by Dino Velvet (Peter
Stormare in an uncharacteristically terrible performance) and
star-torturer "Machine" (Christopher Bauer), they have a big
showdown with Welles where death and mayhem ensue. The movie
doesn't end there, unfortunately, because Welles has to do what
all heroes in Schumacher films do--become a vigilante.
This film doesn't draw you in. It keeps you about 700 miles away
from it and who in their right mind would want to get close? It
IS possible to like a film that focuses on grime and sick
behaviour (ie. "Se7en"), but it takes a large measure of
restraint (Schumacher has none) and a larger amount of talent
(Schumacher has little). By those jabs, I'm not only referring to
his stylish destruction of the "Batman" franchise, but "A Time To
Kill" was an immensely overrated disappointment. For a guy who
gets so much studio money, his track record of making rather bad
movies is unparalleled.
A good screenwriter and a good director can make you hypnotically
watch even disgusting subject matter. Writer Andrew Kevin Walker
didn't recapture the smarts of the fascinating script he authored
for '95s twisted thriller, "Se7en". Director Schumacher doesn't
have that innate ability to make you watch things you don't
really want to see like better directors are capable of doing. He
must not have believed Hitchcock who espoused the theory that
what we don't see is more frightening than what we do (especially
when it's a scene where young girl is supposed to be murdered).
However, gratuitous is Joel's middle name.
He must think that not flaunting a hard-core act of violent sex
is showing plenty of tactful restraint. No, he doesn't go THAT
far, but we see enough unpleasantness. He doesn't leave much to
the imagination. It's manipulating to hurt (or kill) young girls
just to get the audience on the side of a murderous vigilante.
The script and acting should be what gets us to believe in these
characters, yet Schumacher has no subtlety in his (HA HA!) craft.
Case in point, a shot of a Christian Fellowship bus (good,
right?) drives away to reveal one of the villains (bad, right?).
See...no subtlety. Does Joel think we're stupid or that we need
to be held by the hand to comprehend the contrasting imagery? Who
do we root for in this mess? Is there anybody out there?
It's not all the director's fault, though. Why did the actors
sign up for this? Nicolas Cage is an Oscar-winner, for cryin' out
loud! If he claims to do films to challenge himself and for the
artistic merit rather than the money, what was he smoking when
this script dropped on his veranda? What is Cage supposed to be
in this movie--a whispering Batman without the charisma and
pointed ears? Villainous Peter Stormare is five steps past hammy.
And what is James Gandolfini doing in this trash? He was so solid
as a concerned father in "A Civil Action". I guess ol' Nic, Pete,
and Jim were promised a mountain of money...or they're suckers.
Or they just don't care.
There ARE moments (albeit brief ones) where this rises above the
wasteland. Catherine Keener is good (although too quick to
threaten divorce) as Mrs. Wells. Baby Cindy is obviously cute and
Wells' devout love of his daughter is sweet. The mother (Amy
Norton) of the girl in the infamous 8mm film is not too bad as a
woman dealing with the uncertain loss of her runaway daughter.
This film has an appropriate blue-toned, washed-out look like
"Payback" (which was a MUCH better movie). The editing is okay in
scenes of no dialogue, but at other times it's rough. During some
conversations, close-ups and wide shots are not cut very well,
making it look to be editted by someone whose instincts aren't
good and whose timing was a half-second off. Such a technical
error indeed stands out. Speaking of standing out, don't believe
the misleading trailers. There's not much action here.
Occasionally, yes, but not as often as your TV will have you
believe.
After seeing "8MM", I may not be interested in ever watching ANY
kind of porn again. Is that a positive? Well, if making me almost
ill at the thought of glimpsing a dirty movie again is their
motive, they've done a swell job here. It'll be a long time
before I give a Schumacher film another chance--unless I lose my
mind and become seriously depraved. But today I'm not depraved,
so I ask, why does this film preach that this garbage is out
there and that society should be worried about it? I'm sure that
somewhere right now there's some pretty sick crap going on, but
that doesn't mean I need to know about it. Yes, Mr. Walker, your
script tells us that there are some screwed-up folks out there.
Yes, Mr. Walker, the proverbial monster doesn't look like we
expect him to. You said all that in 1995. Move on.
This film serves no purpose. It doesn't entertain, it doesn't
teach us anything, it doesn't make a statement beyond the obvious
"this stuff is bad" approach. Only if this film awakens the
authorities to find a way to abolish these types of horrors would
it ever do someting truly worthwhile. That's not likely to
happen, though, so "8MM" is indeed a scummy waste of money. Orson
Welles said years ago in a tribute to film, "To movies...to good
movies". If only Joel Schumacher and the producers had listened
and told Andrew Kevin Walker to bury this crud deep in a hole.
Like "snuff" films, "8MM" should never have been made. Now,
excuse me while I go try to forget I ever saw it.
USELESS TRIVIA--Joel Schumacher loves the vigilante theme. He
used it in "Batman Forever", in "Batman & Robin", in "A Time To
Kill", in "Falling Down", and it's rumoured that Joel himself
will play the vigilante at his breakfast table tomorrow...


Title
Review for Affliction (1997)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
You should be open-minded when you walk into movie theatres.
It's not fair to pre-judge films and remain closed to the
possibility that you actually might like it. For instance, I
thought that when I finally saw the hyped-up Oscar-winner, "The
English Patient", I would hate it, but it was excellent and
enjoyable. So, yes, preconceived notions can hinder a reviewer
and make the review seem much less credible. Having said all of
that, I strolled into the theatre to see "Affliction" and winced
when Paul Schrader's name appeared as the director. Sorry, but
the ol' mind was a little closed here. The screenwriter of "Taxi
Driver" and "Raging Bull", Schrader seems to have a fixation on
showing every form of the sordid side of society. I think "Taxi
Driver" is highly overrated and the violence is gratuitous. I
hold Schrader responsible.
        Well, if that film is about urban paranoia, "Affliction"
must be about rural paranoia. This is a typical Schrader story of
the seamy underbelly of human life. It probes the emotions and
feelings of its characters very well until the rather abrupt
finale that leaves something to be desired. There's no subtlety
to the conclusion and the film is not as poetic as it tries to
be. It's actually too obvious what they're trying to say with the
metaphors of alcoholism and dealing with pain. However, I hate to
give a poor recommendation to a film that could win two acting
Oscars. So I won't. This is a film worth seeing, if only for Nick
Nolte and James Coburn, who could each win their first trophy
(Nolte for lead actor and Coburn for supporting). The
performances are great, but the movie is unsatisfying.
        The story features Wade Whitehouse (Nolte) a bitterly
divorced father of a little girl and the small town's spineless
cop. He also works as a snow-removal guy. His life is an absolute
mess. His daughter says she loves him, but can't handle being
around him. His girlfriend, Margie (Sissy Spacek), is
sympathetic, but she is unable to positively affect his life.
Willem Dafoe, who narrates and plays his brother, Rolfe, has left
the small Maine town to make a life for himself and forget about
the bad childhood memories he left behind. And that leads us to a
man (James Coburn) who is a cinch to walk up the steps on Oscar
night for his cruelly outstanding supporting performance as
Wade's father, Glen Whitehouse. For this unrepentant role of a
selfish old drunk, and for his lengthy (yet unrewarded career),
Coburn is due.
        When Wade and Rolfe were young, their father verbally abused
them and even resorted to violence. This contemptable man grows
old, not caring that he has scarred Wade inside more than his
punches ever could. Wade tries his best not to be a bad man, but
he is failing. He is a loser and the only thing preventing him
from becoming just his drunken father in the first half of the
film is a desperate attempt to cling to his sanity.
        After an inexperienced hunter is found shot while out with
Wade's friend and co-worker, Jack Hewitt (Jim True), Wade
suspects that the death was a murder conspiracy with several key
players--including his own boss. He sets out to prove it, making
wild accusations, losing his job, and alienating his girlfriend
and daughter. Meanwhile, to add to Wade's troubles, his mother
dies because of his father's uncaring negligence, causing Wade to
move back in and take care of the old bastard.
        This is supposed to be a character study and it certainly is
that. For a little while, it actually looks like a serious
"Fargo". But, towards the end, it takes a hard turn and Wade
collapses into such despair and desperation that he clearly
becomes his father. He fights that transition, but in such a weak
script it's inevitable. I can't say more because that would
reveal too much, but I have one suggestion (which is obviously
months too late!)--the very last image in the film should be of
Nolte's defeated face. After all, he's the thrust of this
slow-moving tale.
        Nolte could take home the golden prize on Oscar Night,
Coburn probably WILL for his years of fine work, and they both
deserve to win. These are definitely characters we care about, no
matter what horrible things they do or say. We want to see what
will happen to them. However, this film is neither enjoyable nor
as intelligent as it wants to be. A better director would have
found a better hook to make the story as unforgettable as its
subjects.
USELESS TRIVIA--Paul Schrader also directed "American Gigolo". If
I ever review that piece of trash, it will get one of the very
rare 0/10 ratings I'll EVER give. There is NO reason for people
to see that film (and I usually give at least SLIGHT
recommendations!).


Title
Review for Message in a Bottle (1999)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        Studio executives have one eye stuck on their profit summary
and the other eye stuck on their calendar. With no small measure
of coincidence, they release certain pictures at the time of
holidays or observances. "Fathers' Day" was released around--get
this!--Fathers' Day, "Independence Day" debutted on the July 4th
weekend, and Christmas flicks come out in December. Therefore, it
was fitting that "Message In A Bottle" swept into theatres on the
Valentines' Day weekend. A romantic love story, this picture is
for lovers to attend and hold hands and cry together and whatnot.
        BUT, don't call this a date movie--at least, a FIRST date
movie. It's not really '99s version of "Sleepless In Seattle" or
even "You've Got Mail". This piece of work is painful to watch. I
wouldn't want to go to see this film on a first date (or even a
second) with a woman I don't know that well. The funny moments
are few and far between and they've set some kind of record for
tears shed in one movie. However, don't take that for negative
criticism--this is an old-fashioned, well acted love story
co-starring one of the all-time greats, Paul Newman. And good ol'
Paul would be worth watching in a tooth-pulling contest.
        While Newman is not the main focus of this movie, the two
leads, Kevin Costner and Robin Wright Penn, certainly are. The
actors must have found some sort of emotional bond when they were
shooting this because while the script is mostly formulaic, their
genuine feelings for each other look real. Call it good acting,
but once the script calls for them to become smitten, they
actually look like they're in love. This relationship is not
hokey or off-putting. Luis Mandoki doesn't go for cheap laughs or
unrealistic sentiment to draw his audience into the movie. So,
it's difficult to stay detached from these attractive characters
for long. 
        The plot revolves around the proverbial message in a bottle.
Divorced mother Theresa Osborne (Wright Penn) takes a short
vacation on the New England coast. While jogging on the beach,
she finds a bottle on the shore. She reads the enclosed letter
and through her research job at the Chicago Tribune proceeds to
track down the author of the note. Her editor (Robbie Coltrane)
publishes the letter, which brings about hundreds of letters of
input from readers. Theresa is already infatuated with whomever
has written the heartbreaking letter and falls for him even more
when, through her persistence (and with assistance from
co-workers), finds that he has written other beautifully sad
letters to his lost beloved. She discovers that the man lives in
the Carolinas. Throwing good sense to the wind, she flies down to
meet this man.
        Garret Blake (Costner) is the lonely boat-builder who lost
his wife, Catherine, two years before. He has not dealt with the
intense pain of her death and neither has her family. He feuds
with them, particularly her brother, Johnny (John Savage), about
who should keep her paintings and other precious things. Also,
Garret lives with Dodge (Newman), his formerly alcoholic, yet
caring, father. Theresa meets Garret and they begin a
relationship almost immediately. Perhaps all this happens a
little quickly, but the movie is only two hours long, after all!
They fall in love, but he hasn't gotten over the loss of his
wife. That's the premise of "Message In A Bottle". To give away
much more would be to give away TOO much.
        While not a monumental romantic movie, this picture was
nicely shot (with a tastefully done bedroom scene) and the actors
are easy on the eyes. Wright Penn is beautiful and believable,
Costner is deliberately aloof (yet likable anyway), and the
legendary Newman is fine as the imperfect father. Costner and
Newman make a great father-son team and they actually look alike.
Wright Penn and Costner are well-cast (with that great chemistry)
and they both show their emotions well.
        This film pulls no punches. It has few surprises. This is
about dealing with intense pain and grief, letting go and moving
on. While it's formulaic and the romance blossoms a little too
perfectly, the acting is just right. Costner usually gets slammed
for his self-indulgence and vanity, but he doesn't even appear
until the 20-minute mark in this movie. Plus, this picture
doesn't revolve around just him, anyway. It's wonderful to see
the magnetic Robin Wright Penn (who picks projects carefully) and
especially delightful to see Newman. As a three-part package,
they're as honest as the movie they're in. So, bring along a
couple boxes of tissues and watch '99s first good love story.
Just be careful who you bring along. First dates beware, but
lovers enjoy.
USELESS TRIVIA--Unrewarded? If (and it's a big if) Paul Newman
receives an Oscar nomination for this supporting role, it would
be only his 2nd nomination of the 90s and only his 5th in 20
years!


Title
Review for Central do Brasil (1998)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        With the exception of the Akira Kurosawa classic "Throne Of
Blood", I had never seen a foreign language film until "Central
Station". Reading subtitles while trying to watch the facial
expressions, set details, and technical aspects of a movie is not
always fun. Heck, it's downright annoying. Still, if the acting
is good and the story is compelling, you have to be willing to
let your eyes do a little walkin' around the entire screen, from
top to bottom.
        This late '98 release is an art film from Brazil about one
lonely woman's seemingly pointless struggle through life. Dora
(Fernanda Montenegro in an Oscar-nominated performance) is an
older woman who spends her time writing letters for people at the
central station. She's become incredibly cynical and doesn't even
bother to mail many of the letters she's entrusted to send to the
intended. A feisty woman named Ana (Soia Lira) and her spunky
son, Josue (Vincius de Oliveira), stop by to send some angry
words to the boy's estranged father. Shortly thereafter, Ana
returns to revise the letter and make a plea for reconciliation.
That day she is run over by a bus and killed instantly, leaving
Josue all alone.
        Dora continues on and the boy, with no place to go, camps
out at the station. He and Dora begin a volatile relationship.
For a short time, she invites the lad to move in with her until
she can handle him no longer and pawns him off on a couple who
"pay" for kids. She buys a TV with the money, which makes her
neighbourly chum, Irene (Marilla Pera), happy, but Dora soon
regrets the decision and rescues the angry kid. From here, this
film has "It Happened One Night" overtones with reversed roles.
Dora sets out on a bustrip with Josue to take him "home" to his
father in another town.
        She takes him about halfway, gets off the bus, and plans to
let him go the rest of the way by himself. Instead, he also gets
off the bus, stranding them both with no money, and forcing her
to continue on the journey. Along the little odyssey, they hitch
a ride with a friendly truck driver, steal food, and learn a
great deal about themselves and each other. When they finally get
to his father's home, they've created a bond of friendship that
transcends age and loneliness.
        This is a story about friendship and love. It's about
discovering your father (metaphorically and literally) and
finding someone to keep you safe. The pains of alcoholism are a
factor, too, since Josue's dad is rumoured to be a drunk. While
Dora is no saint and she tends to push away every man she meets
(including the trucker), she's a lonely woman who is simply
trying to survive.
        Montenegro is solid and heart-felt in this role and, while
the Academy probably won't give her the award, she's a
distinguished nominee for Best Actress. She's the main reason to
see "Central Station". In supporting roles, de Oliveira and Pera
are pretty good, too, and provide comic relief. In fact, this
movie knows when to crack a joke and when to tug at the heart.
Director Walter Salles provides good balance with those aspects
of the script and he uses the camera well.
        "Central Station" is a poetic movie, but it wouldn't be
getting much recognition if not for Fernanda Montenegro. She is
the backbone of this film chronicling the day-to-day hardships of
Brazilian life for the under-privileged and unloved. And those
darn sub-titles aren't so bad when the performances and story are
sweet and agreeable.
USELESS TRIVIA--I have no useless trivia for this film.


Title
Review for Shining, The (1980)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is my 4th of 5 weekly retro reviews honouring great
Jack Nicholson films. "Chinatown", "A Few Good Men", and "One
Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" are already posted on the Internet.
Also, since Stanley Kubrick died just a short time ago, why not
highlight a collabration of two great film artists?)
After winning his first Academy Award for a marvelous performance
in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest", Jack Nicholson went through
a notable, if not particularly successful, phase of his career.
In "The Missouri Breaks" and "The Last Tycoon", Jack appeared
opposite living legends Marlon Brando, Robert De Niro, and Tony
Curtis. He also got to work with directors Arthur Penn and Elia
Kazan in those pictures while directing "Goin' South" himself.
Those three movies might be considered a "warm-up" as he prepared
for his opportunity to do something which very few great actors
ever had the chance to do--to perform in a film for director
Stanley Kubrick.
The secretive and obsessive Kubrick was in the middle of a streak
of his own. "Dr. Strangelove", "2001: A Space Odyssey", "A
Clockwork Orange", and "Barry Lyndon" represented three straight
outstanding films, then one well-made epic. Adapting Steven
King's best-selling novel, "The Shining", was Kubrick's next
project. Shot in England, it was an elaborate horror film which
didn't get the praises from critics that Kubrick's films usually
received. I must be one of the few people who A) liked the team
of Kubrick and Nicholson B) saw much more in this film than just
the ghost story and C) found it to be truly scary. After all,
that IS the point.
Kubrick and co-screenwriter Diane Johnson made drastic changes to
King's in-depth novel. The ugly, abusive family histories for
both the Jack Torrance character (Nicholson) and his wife, Wendy
(Shelley Duvall), were excluded. They also dropped the extensive
flashbacks to the family's life on the East Coast where Jack lost
his teaching job for beating up one of his students. Some
supporting characters were written out and the manager of the
Overlook Hotel, Stuart Ullman (Barry Nelson), is not the
officious jerk King portrayed him to be. Young son Danny (Danny
Lloyd) is no longer a brilliant five-year old, nor is Wendy a
strong woman. Heck, they made Danny dumb and Wendy weak.
Still, the screenwriters' adaptation was an improvement in other
ways. Dialogue isn't always this film's biggest asset, but when
the lines are good, they're REALLY good. And memorable! How about
"Here's Johnny!", "Gimme the bat, Wendy!", the ominous "Redrum",
and the written ramblings of Jack's "All work and no play makes
Jack a dull boy". And dig that elevator of blood! Sure, it's a
blatantly unsubtle image, but it's cool. A major change and a
real credit to the climax is that Kubrick shows more restraint
than King. This is a rare example of where the movie's ending is
much LESS explosive than in the book. And the biggest addition
from novel to screen--eerie music--is a classic example of how
appropriate music can greatly heighten the "fear factor".
The story is familiar. Lifelong failure and recovering alcoholic
Jack Torrance gets a last-chance job as the winter caretaker for
Colorado's elite Overlook Hotel. He's enthusiastic about the job
even though he & his family will be stranded alone for several
months when the brutal winter arrives. He's enthusiastic about
the job even though the hotel has a bloody history and one of the
previous caretakers went crazy and murdered his family. He's even
enthusiastic about the job when he hears that the hotel was built
on an Indian burial ground (hey, what ghost story DOESN'T have an
Indian burial ground!). Jack simply wants solitude to finish a
play he's writing and the chance to forget that he has a rather
horrible life. Wendy and Danny join him, of course, and
everyone's happy. 
Well, actually, Danny isn't. He knows the sordid Overlook is not
Disneyland. He has the power (through his imaginary friend, Tony)
to see the future. The hotel's cook, Dick Hallorann (Scatman
Crothers in a miscast role as a token black victim), also has
this power, this "shining", to read thoughts and warns Danny to
be careful in the ominous Overlook. The naive kid is precocious
like all youngsters and he's both fascinated by the forbidden
aspects of the hotel while being terrified of recurring images of
death and mayhem. Danny's power slowly brings the hotel's demons
to life as Jack struggles through a killer case of writer's
block. Wendy helplessly watches her delicate family fall apart as
Jack's developing insanity (not to mention his "deal" with the
hotel) becomes violent and painful.
The basic plot of this film is an old-fashioned ghost story with
slasher film overtones. The interesting part of the movie is that
the single strongest theme here is not that hotels can drive you
crazy or that experiencing a few bad days at the typewriter gives
you the right to axe your family. The strongest theme here is of
divorce. Here's a husband with no respect for his wife or son. In
one scene, he looks down at a model of the outdoor hedge-maze
while Wendy & Danny walk around inside the real maze. Obvious
metaphor--he "looks down on them". Like many dysfunctional
families, the man can seem perfectly normal & loving to the
outsider and still be quite abusive to his family. As he loses
his mind, Jack has a nightmare about killing Wendy & Danny, he
has a fantasy in the hotel's empty bar that explains the
alcoholic & abusive history, and he doesn't tell his family when
he starts to see dangerous things in the hotel. Nice guy! The man
is simply not a good father and while his wife tries her best to
hold her family together, in the end, she takes the kid and
leaves him--metaphorically divorcing him.
Jack Torrance wants to believe that he's an intelligent man, but
he's just a representation of all the selfish louts who blame
their own failures on their innocent loved ones. He feels
claustrophobic and trapped despite living in such a giant place.
Jack is a massive failure, even as the hotel's caretaker (after
all, he dies and leaves it unattended). Or does dying for the
hotel make him a devoted servant? Well, if that makes him an
accomplished man, he doesn't aspire to very much. This man is
supposed to be a literate writer, yet he becomes a hobbling
lumberjack, then a bellowing beast before the icy ending.
Ironically, Jack's demonic obsession to kill his family is rather
admirable. Geez, parents today couldn't be BOTHERED to chase a
kid in order to kill him. They'd just take away the tyke's Sony
Playstation or give him one of those "hyperactivity" pills!
What makes this film work is its genuine creepiness. Along with
the effective music, Kubrick uses some great camera angles (one
was directly below a standing Jack in the pantry). The Steadicam
shot was a particular favourite in "The Shining" in more than
just the famous scenes following Danny on his Big Wheel. Kubrick
liked the Steadicam technique and used it a lot. It's so smooth
and so appropriate on the huge sets that the technological impact
is underrated. At all times, the camera seems to be a set of eyes
watching these three people as they fritter around in an evil
place. The enormous interior sets were built on a soundstage, yet
they give off an aura that makes you want to drive a snowmobile
up there yourself and tell these people to GET OUTTA HERE RIGHT
NOW!
The glue of this film is Jack Nicholson. It takes quite an actor
to be THAT nuts considering the unending number of takes Kubrick
demands. His scenes in the bar show remarkable lunacy. The
fabulous "gimme the bat, Wendy" scene gives us Nicholson's
trademark character explosion. At times, he's pretty funny too.
Even Jack's "killer smile" has an appropriate name here. He's a
sinister ticking bomb. It's been said that he goes nuts too
quickly and maybe that's true. But the whole point of the story
is that this man felt trapped and ready to explode long before he
ever got to the Overlook. The haunting images and malevolent
results are metaphors to explain how this particular family falls
apart as they lose their collective grip on reality.
Unfortunately, Kubrick's deliberate--heck, downright
slooooow--pacing doesn't score the way it did with "2001".
Strange as this sounds, the film is too long, yet, arguably, the
craziness happens too soon! However, what nearly sunk "The
Shining" altogether was the awful performance by Shelley Duvall.
This acting hack could take some lessons from the appealing
Rebecca De Mornay (who was much better in the 1997 TV movie).
Duvall's chemistry with Danny Lloyd comes and goes. She has
almost NO chemistry with the commanding Nicholson. Sure, her
pathetic performance was probably what Kubrick wanted opposite
the whacko Jack. After all, who WOULDN'T be petrified with fear
as the horrors unfold? But her acting was incredibly weak and it
wasn't even offset by Danny Lloyd. The kid is okay at best and
he's not very lovable or intelligent.
To nitpick--there are noteworthy mistakes in "The Shining".
First, the helicopter's shadow for the overhead shot is visible
during the opening drive up to the hotel. Second, Jack tears
paper out of his typewriter, but doesn't replace it with a fresh
sheet before he starts typing again. Third, he toasts Lloyd the
bartender to "5 miserable months on the wagon", yet Wendy said in
the opening 20 minutes that he hadn't had a drink for 5 months
before they ever GOT to the hotel. Fourth, she slices his hand
during the bathroom door demolition, but in a later shot there's
no blood on the knife. And the most glaring error occurs during
that same demolition. Jack axes through only one side of the door
to do his infamous "Here's Johnny", but later the door is split
in two places. Clearly, the scene of his busting through on the
other side of the door was cut.
So, having analyzed this film to death (pun intended!), I'll
stubbornly maintain that "The Shining" succeeds in spite of its
mistakes and weaknesses. Jack's a devilish cartoon. He's so
compelling in the lead that when he's not on screen, you can't
wait until he comes back. Food for thought--Kubrick didn't hit
the bullseye with this picture and STILL created a memorable
movie. It's quotable and creepy. It makes you jump. Anyone
disappointed that this wasn't a masterpiece should remember that
very few true horror movies have ever been deemed classics,
anyway ("Psycho" is one of the few). "The Shining" showcased
Nicholson's abilities with Kubrick's meticulous direction.
Duvall, Lloyd, and overlength be-damned! This is scary and it's
pretty darn good too.
USELESS TRIVIA--Stanley Kubrick made reincarnation and an
unending cycle of life & death one of the many themes in "The
Shining". Not to compare ANY film to his masterpiece, "2001: A
Space Odyssey", but that idea was the central theme for the 1968
classic too.
This film receives an 8/10.
It also ranks #94 on My 100 Favourite Films list.
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Kiss of the Spider Woman (1985)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
William Hurt, monotone-voiced star of "The Big Chill", "The
Accidental Tourist", "Children Of A Lesser God", and "Broadcast
News" in the '80s, also played the lead in this picture and won
his only Best Actor Oscar. Starring opposite the now-deceased
Raul Julia, Hurt was required to spend the majority of the shoot
in a small "cell" with his co-star, talking and talking. This is
a story that would have died a slow death if not for its
extensive character development. Fortunately, Hurt's emotional
character is so well-acted that the film has a hypnotic effect in
spite of its restrictive environment.
After the opening credits, the cinematographer gets a chance to
provide the viewer with some eye candy as he completely pans
around the South American prison cell where the characters wile
away their time. Molina is a homosexual thrown in prison for
corrupting a minor. His cellmate, Valentin (Julia), has been
imprisoned for his political activism. Their predicament is not
fun, but Molina (Hurt) tries to make the best of it by talking
endlessly about crappy old movies.
Little happens. This film is a fine example of a character study.
We learn about their lives and sins after the interesting opening
shot. Molina hams it up, fondly remembering those bad movies,
dressing and acting the part of a cliched gay man. However, he's
a sympathetic character from the start and, while he doesn't pull
punches about his homosexuality, he is never obnoxious about it.
Incidentally, Hurt was the first actor to ever win an Oscar for
playing a gay man (Tom Hanks in "Philadelphia" was the only
other).
For the first ten minutes, the two men are introduced to us
through their conversation. Valentin, simply unwilling to listen
to what his cellmate is talking about, is filled with anger and
fear. Their opposite personalities clash until Molina later shows
true compassion for his "partner". A tender scene unfolds when
Valentin is poisoned and becomes badly sick, losing control of
his bowels while still dressed. Director Victor Babenco shows
good taste and restraint here when the flamboyant Molina
undresses him to clean and comfort him. Molina gains both
Valentin's trust and ours when he helps the sick man, but doesn't
try to take advantage of him.
Later, we learn that Molina is working with the warden to get
Valentin to talk about his political contacts. Gaining Valentin's
trust and friendship by sharing food brought by his mother and
taking good care of him while he was sick, Molina begins to
regret his betrayal. He also knew about the attempted poisoning.
Still, he goes through with his treasonous acts in order to get
early parole.
Two difficult scenes called for the men to engage in acts of
passion. At a late juncture in the film, Molina encourages
Valentin to "do what you want with me". We know what happens
off-camera, of course. Handled with tact, this scene was pivotal
to the plot, but it stayed away from exploitation and
offensiveness. The other scene required a kiss between the two
stars. Also done with tenderness and class, this is the last
contact the two friends have in the film. Molina contacts
Valentin's girlfriend when he is released as the warden's
henchman follow in hot pursuit. He is tragically shot to death by
the suspicious girlfriend. The final scene features Valentin,
beaten and tortured in prison, dreaming about being reunited with
his girlfriend.
So, where does the Spider Woman fit in? Well, Sonia Braga plays
three roles: Valetin's girlfriend, the star of Molina's "movies",
and as the Spider Woman. Molina tells a story about a shipwrecked
man comforted and loved by the fictious Spider Woman. This
imagery is strong and well-filmed. Molina dies while in love with
his former cellmate, Valentin is in love with his girlfriend, and
the girlfriend--who is still in love but has given up on her man.
A sensitive movie, Hurt toes the line of over-the-top
flamboyance, yet forces the viewer to forget that he is only
acting. This was Hurt's finest performance (ditto for Julia) and
Hurt was recognized for it when he won the Academy Award. What
really touched me about this film was the similarity between it
and a script I once wrote while in college. My script was also
about two jailed men with mysterious backgrounds and the primary
focus was on good dialogue. Babenco's product was award-worty
and, while mine wasn't, I related to what he was trying to do.
This is one of more underrated prison films ever made. In a muted
manner, it's comparable to one of my favourites, "The Shawshank
Redemption". Not much happens for most of the two hours, but it's
absolutely mesmerizing at times. Calling it slow would be unfair,
but it IS true that "Kiss Of The Spider Woman" probably won't be
appreciated by the average '90s movie fan. It is simple and
intelligent and should be viewed with an open mind, so that the
characters played by Hurt and Julia can be allowed to haunt the
viewer as much as they haunt themselves and each other.
USELESS TRIVIA--William Hurt must be fun to work with. He's
played opposite two Oscar-winning actresses, Marlee Matlin
("Children Of A Lesser God") and Geena Davis ("The Accidental
Tourist"). Holly Hunter, his co-star in "Broadcast News", went on
to win the Best Actress prize for "The Piano" in 1993.
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Pure honesty and boyish enthusiasm are two traits that far too
many films in this decade don't care to embrace. As a result,
recurring criticisms of countless pictures is that they're not
believable, they're unlikable, or the whole project is just plain
stupid. With all the mega-movies about disaster and imminent
death (which seems to automatically require a $50 million budget
for the outrageous special effects alone), the proverbial 'Little
Movie That Could' is often overwhelmed and forgotten by the
ticket buyers.
So, here comes "October Sky" with its message of dedication,
love, and hope. It's a good movie, and I don't mean that to
provide a bland analysis. I mean "good" in the sense that it's
got a good heart with wonderful intentions. There's no real
villain here or some higher goal to destroy people or things.
Sure, it has some special effects, but this is one time where
they help the story along, instead of dominating the dog-eared
script. Not once do you sit in the theatre mulling over how the
folks at Industrial Light and Magic did this or that. You're too
busy engrossed in the lives of the small town and its coal miner
mentalities.
Based on the book, "Rocket Boys" by Homer H. Hickam Jr., "October
Sky" chronicles the day-to-day hardships of Coalwood, West
Virginia. It's the fall in 1957 and Russia has just launched
"Sputnik" into orbit. Young nobody Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal,
who is earnest and well-cast) seems to be floating through life
until he sees the satellite shooting by their small community up
in the sky. He's captivated with the idea of getting into space
and rockets become his full-time passion. He and his chums, Roy
Lee (William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), make friends
with the town geek, Quentin (Chris Owen). The four boys
enthusiastically study and learn and fail in their attempts to
get a rocket to successfully shoot off into the wild blue yonder.
Meanwhile, Homer's father, John (Chris Cooper), runs the town's
coal mine. Mining is his life and he thinks it should be Homer's
life, too. The obvious conflict is father vs. son, but it's also
about the desire to shoot for the heavens and keep out of the
ugly pit of hell--up vs. down. Now, that's not to say that John
Hickam is the devil. He's a hard man, but a good man. He treats
most people right, but he's tough on his family, especially the
passionate Homer. John is sternly against his son's hobby (or is
it an obsession?) and pushes him to get into the mining business.
After being blamed for a forest fire caused by a "rocket", their
equipment is confiscated and they are forced to stop
experimenting. Glumly, they accept their fate and temporarily
quit.
Homer never gives up on his dreams, though, even when he has to
fill in for his father on the job. After John saves the lives of
a dozen men (but nearly loses his eye and his life), he's laid up
for a few weeks. Homer realizes his obligation to the family and
goes to work in the coal mines. He doesn't like it, but he's a
natural miner. Meanwhile, Miss Riley (Laura Dern), the boys' high
school teacher, continues to inspire them (particularly Homer) to
do something great with their lives. She wants them to enter the
National Science Fair and is only satisfied when they do. Because
this is based on a true story, it has a positive ending with some
bittersweet aspects, too.
In the middle, this film loses its focus on Homer's rocketeering
efforts and gets into the family conflicts. Near the end, as the
miners strike and the town looks to be crumbling, family tensions
increase until everything blows. While those scenes are
necessary, the film's strength is in its laugh-out-loud humour,
warmth, and ingenuity of the boys and their rockets. Ironically,
I softly criticize the filmmakers for forgetting about the rocket
exploits, yet these family scenes were the ones I could best
understand. Still, it's not easy to watch a story of a boy and
his father who cannot relate and don't get along because that's
my story, too.
Director Joe Johnston has made a fine film here--better than
"Honey, I Shrunk The Kids", for instance, which was also a sweet
movie about families and technology. Johnston uses the technical
aspects well in conjunction with the story in "October Sky". One
of the most important facets is the support for the "Rocket Boys"
by the entire community as they willingly help the boys out in a
heartfelt, but honest way. This film is not sappy or manipulative
and it's bound to bring a tear to the eye at the resolution,
especially if you can relate to these people like I can. Rockets
and mines are the metaphors. Love, forgiveness, and hope are the
messages. When "October Sky" isn't entertaining you, it's
touching you.
USELESS TRIVIA--Producer Charles Gordon also produced "Field Of
Dreams", a movie with a very strong element of father/son forgiveness 
and acceptness.


Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
        As 1998 coasted along for approximately ten or eleven months
with an abominable slew of pathetic releases, it seemed that we
were going to hit a new year-long low in American cinema.
However, movie executives seem to think that the Oscar voters
have short memories, so they cram a theatre-full of good movies
into November and December.
        A film like "Shakespeare In Love" was worth waiting for.
Almost all by itself, it can dispel the notion that 1998 was a
bad year. With a sizzling total of 13 Oscar nominations, this
fine piece of work has been getting heaps of critical acclaim and
deserves every bit of it. The complete antithesis of "Saving
Private Ryan"--its chief rival for many of the major awards in
March--"Shakespeare In Love" is funny, rousing, romantic,
lyrical, and intelligent. (I'll save any further gushing for
later--no sense in using up all my good adjectives so soon into
the review).
        The plot is simply within the name of the film--the
legendary William Shakespeare falls in love. Shakespeare (Joseph
Fiennes) is penning his latest play, a comedy called "Romeo and
Ethel The Pirate's Daughter". His eventual love-interest, Viola
(Gwyenth Paltrow in an Oscar-nominated performance), is about to
get stuck in one of those prearranged marriages that we all love
to hate in the movies. Shakespeare mopes around writing his
sub-par play and casting a bunch of hilariously lousy actors to
fill the roles, while Viola knows his work, loves it, and wants
to play Romeo.
        Now, don't forget that back in the days of The Bard, women
were not allowed on the stage. To get a fair opportunity, the
gifted young woman masquerades as a boy in order to land the lead
role. Naturally, she is such a good actress that she deceives
everyone for a little while. That is, until Shakespeare confesses
his devout love for the real version (the female version) of
Viola (whom he had seen earlier at an upper-class function) to
her moustachioed male alter ego.
        Despite a marriage he doesn't confess to and that
prearranged marriage she's stuck in, the two kids fall completely
in love. She inspires him to write the play that we all know as
the tragic masterpiece, "Romeo And Juliet", and she captivates
everyone with her acting ability. Of course, she is eventually
exposed as a woman and all proverbial heck breaks loose.
        To say much more about the plot would ruin it for someone
who hasn't had the good fortune to see the film. The plot DOES
deserve plenty of kudos though, just as every other feature in
the picture does. Director John Madden (a great name, but not the
football dude) combines so many elements of technical, musical,
and acting brilliance that it's too bad that it all must come to
an end. This is a rare movie about English people who didn't make
me want to retch and throw things at the screen. When it was
over, I wanted to go out and rent a copy, any copy, of Romeo and
Juliet! It's THAT inspiring.
        Paltrow and Fiennes are absolutely spectacular together.
They burn up the screen. We see their forbidden love grow in the
same way that the love between Romeo and Juliet grows. Paltrow is
even more impressive when you consider that she is 100% American,
yet speaks with a fine English accent.
        Some terrific editing sequences parallel the film's story
with the story-within-the-story and the triumphant score is
infectious. But this picture never takes itself too seriously. It
pokes fun at its characters and makes inside jokes about how
Shakespeare took inspiration from other people when writing his
plays. Also, this movie is laugh-out-loud funny at times,
snickeringly silly at others. When we get to the appropriate
ending, the only complaint is, "I truly enjoyed that. Why isn't
there more?"
        The wonderful performances of Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, and
Judi Dench are all nominated for Oscars (Rush and Dench in
supporting performances), but Fiennes (Ralph's little brother)
was snubbed. It's too bad too because this could have been the
first film to win 4 acting awards in the history of the Academy
Awards. "Shakespeare In Love" has 10 other nominations to brag
about, from music score to cinematography to costume design.
Simply put, it's worthy of each any every one of them.
        "Saving Private Ryan" is still probably the best film of
'98, but it has some fierce competition. "Shakespeare In Love" is
glorious and fun. It's going to be "flip a coin" time on Oscar
Night for Best Picture between these two lead horses. Whichever
side the coin lands will be fine with me. It's war versus love
and maybe love CAN conquer all--even Steven Spielberg!
USELESS TRIVIA--If this film wins in each of the 3 acting
categories for which it's nominated, it would be the first to win
3 Oscars for acting in 22 years (Network, 1976).


Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The decade of the '90s has not been infinitely wonderful for
Clint Eastwood. The Hollywood icon followed "Unforgiven" with "In
The Line Of Fire", then did some sub-par films like "Absolute
Power" & "Midnight In The Garden Of Good And Evil". Those first
two films are much, much better than the second two or even "A
Perfect World". So it's safe to say that Eastwood has slipped in
the latter part of the decade after a couple of near-brilliant
pictures. The decade ends with his latest, "True Crime", a
thriller with plenty of ups & downs. Not quite a top-notch
effort, this film is watchable more for Eastwood's fine acting
than his acceptable, yet standard, directing.
Eastwood stars as Steve Everett, a crack reporter for the Oakland
Tribune who is long in the tooth and living on reputation. To
give this movie a nice dose of humanity, Everett is written as a
thoroughly flawed character (aren't we all thoroughly flawed
characters?). He's a recovering alcoholic who cares only about
himself in his quest for self-fulfillment. Despite having a
wonderful family--an attractive wife & an adorable daughter--he's
a philaderer too. Basically, he's a real person with real
problems. And he's a person who has his own journalistic
standards. After all, Everett resigned from a prestigious
newspaper when his bosses wouldn't print some juicy details he
digs up about the mayor while working in New York. Eastwood plays
this character very well, making us like him even though he's
such a selfish rascal.
Everett is rumbling through life in Oakland, carrying on in an
affair with his editor's wife and also trying to score with a
young female reporter. After that young reporter dies in a car
accident, Everett is assigned to fill in for her and do a fluff
interview with a young black prisoner, Frank Beachum (Isaiah
Washington), in San Quentin. Beachum is scheduled to be put to
death by lethal injection that night for the shooting murder of a
white pregnant woman in a convenience store. Editor Bob Findley
(Denis Leary) phones his own home to discover Everett just
dressing after a tryst with Bob's wife. He gives the assignment
to the notorious old reporter, partly hoping Everett will screw
up and get himself fired. And going against orders by not just
writing a low-key human interest piece, the man with the "nose"
snoops around to see if young Beachum really is guilty or not.
On his odyssey of fact-finding, Everett has an unfortunate
incident with his cute little daughter at the zoo, interviews a
key witness who has dubious information about the murder, and
struggles through the tense situation at work. Meanwhile, Beachum
sits on death row, awaiting a fate he may or may not deserve. He
claims he's innocent of the murder, but cannot offer any evidence
to clear his name. In fact, only Everett and Beachum's family
even care about whether or not this man is innocent since Beachum
has been sitting on death row for 6 years. It's old news to most
people, including the lawyers and witnesses involved. Everett's
snooping reveals surprises and other clues, eventually leading
him to believe that maybe Beachum is indeed innocent. His only
task is to find some kind of proof. In a bubble-gum, car-chasing,
action finale Everett races to try and beat the clock and find
that elusive proof.
"True Crime" is a manipulating film. It tugs at the heartstrings
by making us like a man who may in fact be a murderer. It makes
us like Everett too, even though he's not an upstanding citizen
and everything he does is either selfish or rebellious. Even the
prison employees are likable since they are not portrayed as
typical movie monsters who inhumanely brutalize the criminals.
The most obvious heartstring puller, though, has to be the
portrayal of both Beachum's daughter and Everett's daughter. Who
can resist such innocence and sweetness? These young girls
provide a direct contrast to the ominous task of a (legal) murder
that is looming at 12:01 that night. So the manipulating is
tolerable because it isn't overly sentimental, yet Eastwood dares
you to dislike the likable main characters.
The script is solid, if predictable. It provides a good analysis
of the whole death penalty process. Also, we get a small glimpse
into the fast-moving politics of a newspaper office. James Woods
plays the Senior Editor, Alan Mann, in his typically dynamic way.
He's got the best lines and gets some good laughs. The only major
contrivance is that this one reporter could discover so many
clues that no one else could find after 6 years! He may be a good
reporter, but if a team of detectives and lawyers can't figure
out some of the things that Everett does, maybe we need a brand
new justice system! I can't reveal an even bigger contrivance in
the picture because it would give away the ending. Still, the
script delves pretty deeply into these characters considering
that the majority of the movie takes place in a 24-hour period.
Call this a day-in-the-life of a scoundrel reporter and a nice
guy "murderer".
Eastwood's direction is okay, but to call this a walk in the park
would be understating it. It's verrrrry deliberate pace almost
undermines the script and its characters before the long-awaited
climax. It's a long 2 hours to watch this film, but a fulfilling
2 hours all the same. Perhaps an extra few seconds comes from
Eastwood's use of slo-mo a couple of different times. This is
notable because he said he didn't like slo-mo during the American
Film Institute's "100 Years, 100 Movies" show last year and
rarely uses the technique. It's also ironic that this is set in
Oakland because Eastwood has set so many films in the city right
across the bay--San Francisco.
Since "True Crime" is a quiet thriller with "whodunnit"
overtones, it isn't for all tastes. I predicted the final result,
but I still had plenty of thinking to do along the way. It's a
thinking man's movie. Along with some social commentary about the
death penalty, Eastwood has crafted a film that doesn't claim to
have all the answers--mostly about marital and work troubles.
Eastwood should also be commended for not stereotyping the black
"murderer" or Beachum's family. Isaiah Washington is muted and
doesn't exactly remind one of Denzel Washington, but he's
sympathetic and likable in his role. Ultimately, the final
pay-off isn't monumental and that keeps this film from being an
instant Eastwood classic. "True Crime" is a solid film with
interesting characters--a pretty nice counter to all those teen
films out there right now!
USELESS TRIVIA--Clint Eastwood's daughter in "True Crime" is his
real daughter as well. The adorable girl's mother is Frances
Fisher (who also appears briefly in this film). Mother Fisher
appeared in "Unforgiven" with Eastwood. Make the connection...
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
One of the more unusual and suggestively violent films ever made,
"Se7en" is just a few steps away from brilliance. However, those
few steps away are only a few steps from a level of evil and
depravity that few people want to discuss. The film received
mixed reviews upon release, but there's an underlying sinister
appeal and intrigue to this that many critics perhaps did not
notice. At times it gets preachy about the horrors it seems to be
criticizing, but the script and the ultimate pay-off are
excellent. The shocking conclusion is just as unpredictable as
the endings of most films ARE predictable.
This piece of work is 100% intensity. It's uncomfortable to
watch, yet compelling. "I want not to look, yet I cannot turn
away." The story creeps along slowly and deliberately, crafted by
visionary director David Fincher. He has experience in
tantalizing his audience with information and visions, but not
giving away too much too soon. This is the guy who directed the
ominous "Alien 3". "Se7en" is even more ominous because the
threat is real. It's human and, while the script takes some
artistic licence, the way in which the diabolical killer works
here is actually realistic. That is, if a human being could be so
intelligent, patient, wealthy, and disillusioned.
After the most bizarre opening credits I've ever seen
(refreshingly different in editing style and musical
accompaniment), the initial character development takes place.
Morgan Freeman stars as Detective William Somerset, a
knowledgeable veteran who is ready to give up on his job and the
sickness of society. Brad Pitt co-stars as Detective David Mills,
the young hotshot who is brand new to this unnamed city and full
of fury to catch the bad guys. These two fine actors give the
film its human qualities (along with the appealing Gwyneth
Paltrow, who plays Tracy, Mills' wife). However, none of them
stands out above the material. No disrespect intended, but two
other actors could have played these parts and the film probably
would have been about the same.
An ironic note is that Somerset has only a week (or 7, that's
SEVEN, days) left on the force to train his young protege. The
title of the picture also refers to the 7 deadly sins, as
chronicled by John Milton in "Paradise Lost"--Gluttony, Greed,
Sloth, Lust, Pride, Envy, & Wrath. Incidentally, I wrote the sins
in order of how each victim was found. It's the last two sins
that are the most intriguing and shocking, but I won't give that
away. As I said, this has a great ending and no one should spoil
it. Anyway, the brilliant killer sets out to make a statement to
the world that these sins will no longer be tolerated and he
makes the "sinners" suffer for it.
The two partners stumble over the corpse of a grotesquely obese
man. They learn that he was murdered--forced to eat himself to
death. The killer leaves small clues at this and other murders
and, of course, Somerset and Mills are smart enough to stay with
him all the way. If they didn't, it would be one short movie! The
deliberate pace allows for craftsmanship of detail and story. We
see a lot of blood, but it's not especially violent. The
suggestion of what happens is far more disgusting than anything
actually shown--like most of the violence in "Pulp Fiction".
"Se7en" is gory, graphic, and disturbing, but all the gore is
post-death. Still, if you tend to get queasy, don't eat food
during this film.
Kevin Spacey plays John Doe, the avenging angel who claims that
he's the messenger who will right the wrongs with his teachings.
Like many crazy men, he has some fine ideas, but some sick ways
of expressing himself. Spacey doesn't appear until the final 30
minutes and also doesn't receive billing in the opening credits.
However, it's HIS appearance that turns this film upside down and
for that he should have gotten an Oscar nomination. A great
villain manages to make you either root for him or feel compelled
to listen to his ramblings regardless of whether you agree with
him or not. This character is so well written that it's hard to
disagree when he says that what he is doing will be remembered by
everyone. No serial killer has ever been so creative.
"Se7en" is blatantly unsubtle with its messages about the horrors
of the world and it's often a little too depressing. What it
lacks in those areas, it makes up for with believable dialogue,
top-notch screenwriting, unexpected twists, and realistic
characters. The technical aspects of the film are unobtrusive.
Fincher uses lighting, music, and editing quite well, but his
story is always the thrust of the film. Fortunately, we don't
find out what happens to Mills and Somerset after the closing
credits (which are run backwards UP the screen!). It's better to
imagine what paths they will follow. This is not the kind of film
you turn away from and quickly forget. It's got a sinister
message and John Doe is right about one thing--the evils of the
world aren't going to cure themselves. "Se7en" raises some tough
questions and it's intelligent enough to allow its audience to
answer many of those questions for themselves.
USELESS TRIVIA--Co-stars in 1995's "Se7en", Brad Pitt and Kevin
Spacey also competed for the 1995 Best Supporting Actor
Oscar--Pitt in "12 Monkeys", Spacey in "The Usual Suspects" (for
which he won).


Title
Review for Few Good Men, A (1992)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is the 2nd of 5 retro reviews of Jack Nicholson films
I plan to do in the next few weeks. Starting with "Chinatown"
last week, I will analyze five of Jack's very best performances.)
Great dialogue stays with you. Heck, if it's good enough, you can
sit around with your friends and recite half a movie. There was a
time in college that I could shout out almost every line in "A
Few Good Men". The famous courtroom climax ("YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE
TRUTH...") was only the best part of a script where if you sat
beside me, you might think the stereo surround effect of this
movie was really terrific. Of course, some people get annoyed by
such grandstanding, so I had to watch the powerful film alone.
Soon after, I stopped watching it altogether and hadn't seen it
for well over a year. That is, until a few nights ago when the
worn-out tape found its way into the VCR. And you know what--I
can STILL follow right along almost flawlessly!
A critical and financial success, this film hits the right
buttons. A blockbuster when it came out in '92, "A Few Good Men"
is full of people who are movie stars, not actors. Although Jack
Nicholson has won 3 Oscars and Tom Cruise should win one or two
eventually, they are movie stars first and thespians second. This
label has kept Cruise from getting the critical praise he
deserves, but it doesn't hinder him at all in finding great
projects and great castmates. By co-starring with Paul Newman,
Dustin Hoffman, and Robert Duvall before this role opposite
Nicholson (and later with Gene Hackman and Jon Voight), Cruise
showed he was worthy of working with the best. And, save for
Steven Spielberg, Cruise has been guided by most of the great
directors of the last 30 years. Holding it against him because
he's handsome is silly. He graces the scenes he's in with charm
and talent instead of barging in and dominating them.
Director Rob Reiner was looking for "a few good men" when he shot
this picture. He found more than a few--first selecting the right
man to play Lt. Daniel Kaffee (Cruise) in this charged-up
courtroom drama. All the aforementioned barging and dominating is
done by one of the great villains of the '90s, Colonel Nathan R.
Jessep (Nicholson in his 10th Oscar-nominated performance).
Nicholson could easily have won the Best Supporting Actor award
for turning this movie upside down and for so effectively tearing
everything apart. Let's not forget about Lt./Commander JoAnne
Galloway (played by another movie star, Demi Moore), Captain Jack
Ross (Kevin Bacon), Lt. Sam Weinberg (Kevin Pollack), or Lt.
Kendrick (Kiefer Sutherland). 
The powerhouse cast compliments Aaron Sorkin's screenplay (based
on his own play) about two young marines based in Cuba who are
charged with the murder of one of their fellow marines. The movie
opens with the death of PFC William T. Santiago, a notorious
screw-up who accidentally dies during a hazing ritual
administered by Lnc./Cpl. Dawson and PFC Downie. We later learn
that their superior officers (Jessep and Kendrick) ordered this
"Code Red" to bring Santiago back in line after breaking the
chain of command and ratting to higher authorities on Dawson for
an illegal fenceline shooting. Santiago had been pleading for a
transfer off the base for 9 months and hoped the information he
had about the fenceline shooting could be exchanged for that
transfer. The fanatical Colonel Jessep gets hold of the letter
and lectures to his Executive Officer Lt./Colonel Markinson (J.T.
Walsh) and Kendrick that rather than pawning off their
sub-standard marine, they should "train the lad". Ironically,
they order Dawson--the very marine who could face disciplinary
action because of Santiago's tattling--to beat some sense into
him. After the boy dies, Jessep covers it up and Markinson goes
along with it despite his strenuous objections.
While that is essentially the plot, this film is not just about
marines or cover-ups or revenge. It's about daring to defy higher
powers (and often logic) and doing what's right by following your
conscience. That applies to Dawson and Downie (Wolfgang Bodison
and James Marshall, respectively) as well as Kaffee, their
attorney. He's the hot-shot young Navy lawyer and the best young
litigator in the JAG corps--particularly at plea-bargaining. He's
never seen the inside of a courtroom and tries to get his two
clients to accept a deal rather than risk getting put in jail for
life by facing a losing battle in a formal court martial. The
young marines refuse to plead guilty and take the deal because
they maintain they were only following orders. Galloway nags
Kaffee to stand up and defend them. He reluctantly takes the case
to court despite a complete lack of evidence in their favour
(after all, they DID kill Santiago). They step on numerous
landmines until the infamous climax between young pony Cruise and
old warhorse Nicholson where the truth is exposed in a huge
explosion of tension and drama.
The script takes a few liberties. Any lawyer worth his salt would
drop the case when the reluctance of his two defendants to accept
a sweet deal puts them all in such peril. By going into the
courtroom with no evidence (and with their clients having a
motive), they can only assign the blame for the death to Jessep
and Kendrick. If Kaffee falsely accuses the decorated officers
without proper evidence, he would face a career-destroying court
martial of his own. It's the superfluous sub-plot about his late
father (who was a legendary lawyer) that probably explains why he
throws caution to the wind and tries to win such an unwinnable
case by street-smarts and spin-doctoring alone. He wants to live
up to his father's legacy (and probably to stop Galloway from
pestering him!).
Criticisms--It's doubtful that Nicholson's remarkable thundering
during a court martial would be accepted by any judge. He doesn't
so much answer questions on the witness stand as he tells the
world how lucky it is to have such a strong man defending the
nation. Other small problems occurred with the usually top-notch
editing. During an early scene where baseball-loving Kaffee takes
batting practice, the conversation between he and Galloway is cut
in such a way that the continuity is a little off. In one shot
he's in the process of swinging the bat. Quickly cut to the other
and the bat is already on his shoulder. And to nitpick, we see
Kaffee watching a ballgame between Minnesota and Baltimore after
the case has begun. How?! The case starts on October 3rd and that
would be World Series time. Well, at least American League
Championship Series time, but those two teams didn't even meet in
the playoffs! Sorry, I'm scrutinizing, but it's a noticeable
gaffe. Also, I HATE when modern movies say "The End" when it's
over. Arggh!
However, everything in those last two paragraphs is a careful
criticism. This movie scores in a big way and only a long-time
fan would even care about the mistakes. Two of the finest
dialogue-driven films of the '90s (non-Tarantino works, of
course) came out in 1992 (this and "Glengarry Glen Ross") and "A
Few Good Men" stands above all. Sorkin wrote this in a way that
the court scenes were dynamic and the Kaffee/Galloway
relationship was heated yet platonic. Many of the characters
learn to respect each other, but the film doesn't manipulate a
perfect ending. It wraps up right when it should. Because of the
sharp editing--save for those small continuity errors--this is
fast-paced and completely riveting. During scenes of
conversation, it's like you're right there with the actors and
you forget that everyone's dialogue was filmed separately.
The screenplay has racist, sexist characters, but the movie rises
above those shady slimeballs. Both Jessep and Kendrick have
racial and sexist issues (if you listen to what they say and how
they say it, you'll understand). Still, the underdogs (the female
Galloway, the black Dawson, the Jewish Weinberg, and the kid
Kaffee) match the tough guys because the actors exude appropriate
strength and charisma. You'll get some laughs when the subject
matter eases up a little, too. The cinematography is fantastic at
times--especially during the rifle drill during the opening
credits--and the sound mix is fine. This film scored for North
Americans for many reasons--it's patriotic, dynamic, cultural,
interesting, and so well acted by its superstars.
In two of Nicholson's few scenes, he and Cruise are at opposite
ends of the spectrum. Cruise looks like a baby next to Jack, but
that's the point. Will we buy into Kaffee beating the proverbial
truth out of Jessep? Oh yeah, we do. This is "Star Wars" without
the lightsabers. We know exactly who the good guy is and who the
bad guy is. Cruise is confident, but he's human. We relate to the
young man and we like him. Without a doubt, Colonel Jessep is one
of the great screen villains of the '90s. Nicholson's eyes burn
with hatred and his body manner is incredibly powerful.
"A Few Good Men" skillfully hits the mark with a bullseye. It's
intense when it should be and funny when it should be. Finely
crafted and well-cast, it remains one of the more memorable
courtroom dramas in film history. If you ever forget why, give me
a buzz and I'd be happy to shout "YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE TRUTH..."
and the rest of the script in near-perfect synchronization.
USELESS TRIVIA--Along with the superstars in "A Few Good Men",
youngsters Noah Wyle (Dr. Carter on TV's "E.R.") and Cuba Gooding
Jr. (Oscar-winner in "Jerry Maguire") also appeared.


Title
Review for Canadian Bacon (1995)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The late John Candy starred in quite a wide range of
comedies in his movie career. By that, I mean, he made some truly
funny comedies and some truly awful comedies. It seemed that he
was just hitting his stride with some fine performances in the
'90s when his excessive lifestyle did him in for good. With the
exception of the terrible "Wagons East", Candy had a string of
solid roles in the early part of this decade (in "JFK", "Only The
Lonely", and "Cool Runnings" among others) to establish himself
as a future Oscar contender. While "Canadian Bacon" was not
award-worthy, the corny little movie was entertaining--especially
if you're Canadian.
Candy (in his final film) stars as Bud Boomer, a dippy
sheriff from Niagara Falls, New York. His main desire is to goof
off with his friends. He also tends to believe whatever he sees
on television. He has grown up with an attitude about
Canada--that we Canucks are overly polite, too clean, and our
beer "sucks". That ironic comment (ironic because OUR beer is
much better than any U.S. brew!) at a hockey game in Canada
starts a massive brawl.
Meanwhile, the American President (Alan Alda) watches his
popularity rapidly dropping. His advisers tell him to start a
paper war with Canada (Operation: Canadian Bacon). The media feed
on this declaration of "war". Bud and his buddies believe the
propaganda and decide to invade Canada to aid the cause.
Believing that they're part of some sort of military strike
force, they break into the country (no difficult task) and start
doing horrible things--like littering. One member of Bud's
entourage, Honey (Rhea Perlman), gets trapped and subsequently
imprisoned by the Mounties. The scenes that develop with Stephen
Wright as the Mountie holding her hostage are among the funniest
in the entire film. Bud and company try to rescue Honey and,
thinking that the capital of Canada is in Toronto, arrive at the
C.N. Tower for the final crazy showdown.
With supporting roles filled by Kevin Pollack, Rip Torn, and
Dan Aykroyd, "Canadian Bacon" has no shortage of talent. The
jokes about Canada are funnier if you happen to be Canadian.
Perhaps the average American wouldn't understand that we don't
pronounce certain words (like "out") the same as they do. It's
also somewhat ironic that John Candy appeared as an American
hell-bent on destroying this country when he was, in reality, a
patriotic citizen of The Great White North. The movie doesn't
quite hit home because it relies too much on the same joke. If
talented director Michael Moore was going for a strong satire, he
didn't make the humour quite vicious enough (or even funny
enough) to work for the full 90 minutes. Still, it wouldn't be a
poor choice for the whole family to rent. It's harmless.
Without a doubt, John Candy was a wonderfully funny fellow.
He should be remembered for his kind heart and sense of humour.
It's too bad that his final comedies ("Wagon's East" and
"Canadian Bacon") weren't quite as good as, say, the sweet "Only
The Lonely". The charismatic actor left this world before he had
the opportunity to receive much recognition for his hard work.
Still, Candy would have wanted his fans to remember how he made
us laugh. Rent "Canadian Bacon" and I hope you'll get a chuckle
or two.
USELESS TRIVIA--John Candy, along with hockey great Wayne Gretzky
and former L.A. Kings owner Bruce McNall, purchased the Toronto
Argonauts CFL football club before the 1991 season. That powerful
trio sure did something right--the team won the Grey Cup in 1991.


Title
Review for Vita č bella, La (1997)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
As Charlie Chaplin's classic "City Lights" told us, smile
though your heart is breaking, smile even though it's aching. And
if you can entertain your kid while you're at it, all the better.
Roberto Benigni's Italian film of a man's love for his family is
up for some of the high-profile Academy Awards (Best Picture,
Best Director, Best Actor, etc.), but it's just a notch below the
competition. The brilliance and star-power of both "Saving
Private Ryan" and "Shakespeare In Love" will probably relegate
"Life Is Beautiful" to winning lesser, yet still significant,
awards (Best Foreign Language Film, for example.)
As writer, director, and charismatic star of this Italian
comedy/drama, Benigni has created a remarkable character who
never loses sight of what's important to him. He's also written a
multi-dimensional script that takes us on an unexpected journey
through war-torn Europe during World War II. The first half of
the film is almost entirely comedy as Guido Orefice (Benigni)
meets his dream woman, Dora (Nicoletta Brashci), and keeps
running into her on purpose. Also working as a waiter, the
aspiring bookshop owner makes plenty of friends with his wit and
plenty of enemies with his irreverance.
The second half of the film takes a mild turn toward drama,
but, as I said, it doesn't lose its way. Guido and Dora
consummate their love and flash-forward to a few years later when
young Giosue (Giorgio Cantarini) is born. After years of marital
happiness, Dora returns home one day to find that Guido, his
uncle (Giustino Durano), and Giosue have been captured and
imprisoned in a Nazi concentration camp. She asks the Nazis to
take her, too. Although the family can't be together (she's kept
in a separate women's camp), they don't lose hope that they'll be
together again.
The boy doesn't understand why they've been thrown into such
a place, so to keep him from panicking or even being gassed to
death (as children were in the camps), Guido makes it into a
game. He tells Giosue that they will be given a real tank if they
win the game. He makes up rules that will keep the kid safe if he
follows them. His antics are funny and the adorable boy falls for
it, thinking he and his father will win first prize if they
accumulate 1000 points. Ah, ignorance is bliss. If only everyone
who'd been placed in those horrible concentration camps could
have kept such a hopeful heart...
Man, it's hard to write about the holocaust. Such a hateful
display of politics and inhumanity is awful to imagine and
difficult to write about even in 1999. However, Benigni doesn't
allow his audience to brood over the horrors of WWII too long. He
keeps our spirits up when he entertains his son. I can't remember
smiling and feeling so terrible simultaneously in quite this way
before. I was both the boy AND his father during the final hour
of the film. I was scared for their lives and giggling at the
whoppers he would tell his son to keep him from knowing the
hideous truth. If all parents lied to their kids for such good,
loving reasons, maybe the global crime rates wouldn't be so
brutally high. Yes, I'm preaching, but parents can learn
something from this film about raising their kids under the worst
possible strain. So the Jeep stalls on the way to violin lessons,
tough noogies! It's easier than dragging anvils around all day
and then struggling to convince your son that the worst thing
that could happen is they won't win this supposed game. Sorry, no
more preaching...
Benigni is a naturally gifted artist. He occasionally evokes
the immortal Charlie Chaplin, which may be high praise, but it's
worthy praise. As director, he uses his supporting cast extremely
well, allowing many of their paths to cross in poignant or
humourous ways. As lead actor, he is excellent, but will be
hard-pressed to pry the Oscar away from Ian McKellan or Nick
Nolte. Still, his character is as well-developed as those and
he's more likable.
The film's conclusion is not spectacular or unexpected, but
it's quite emotional all the same. These characters are simple
and real and we fall in love with them. The film builds up and
becomes more enthralling as time ticks by. It's not quite
perfect, but "Life is Beautiful" is a unique piece of
story-telling. Once they draw you in, not even having to read
subtitles seems to be a chore. After all, if Guido can smile
though his heart is breaking, so can we.
USELESS TRIVIA--I'd like to have some, but I have no useless
trivia for this heart-felt movie.


Title
Review for Payback (1999)
        An early winner in 1999 is "Payback". Now, any film with Mel
Gibson taking credit as the star is a pretty solid bet to rake in
a few bucks, but I didn't expect much from this picture. It's
ironic that Mel's character in "Payback" is interested in raking
in a few bucks of his own--all $70,000 of it.
        He stars as Porter (like Madonna or Fabio, it's just a
one-word name), a street hood and petty thief. Well, if you can
call stealing over $100,000 "petty thievery", that is.
Regardless, Porter is essentially a scummy bad guy. Don't forget,
the trailers said to "get ready to root for the bad guy". And
root for him we do.
        Porter's voice-over describing himself and his sleazy little
life sets up the movie in the opening minutes. It's accompanied
by some funky retro music. One of the great aspects of "Payback"
is the soundtrack from the era of rather crappy music--the late
70s and early 80s. They never say when this film is set or even
where, but the rotary telephones, clothes, and bad make-up
indicate that it's from 15 or 20 years ago.
        Anyway, fresh from being stiffed by his cohort in the heist
of $130,000, Porter sets out to retrieve his share of the money.
Naturally, the double-crossing partner doesn't just hand over the
money when they meet. He gave it to "The Outfit" to buy his way
into their mob-like family. If he DID just hand over the money,
the killing spree Porter goes on for the next hour of the film in
trying to reclaim his $70,000 would never have existed and then
where would we be?
        Director Brian Helgeland's screenplay is witty and
revealing.  There's a limited amount of needless wisecracking but
constant development of the main characters, both Mel and Maria
Bello. One of the refugees from "ER", Bello is well-cast as the
hooker girlfriend. She is gorgeous (except for the hideous
eye-shadow) and believable in the role.
        Helgeland, who made his debut in the big chair with this
picture after co-writing an Oscar-winning screenplay for "L.A.
Confidential" in 1997, makes full use of the dialogue and story
and he has to. This is not a beautiful movie to look at since
Helgeland chose to apply a washed-out look. There is nothing
glamorous to show in the world of these slime-balls, but the dull
look doesn't mean it's ever dull to watch. Not since "Pulp
Fiction" have criminals and low-lifes been glorified in such a
wonderful way.
        Some other highlights of "Payback" are a butt-kicking, S&M
lovin' prostitute, several strong supporting performances (from
David Paymer, Kris Kristofferson, and James Coburn among others), and 
that groovy music. Of course, the anchor of this movie is Mel Gibson,
one of the top stars in the entire world. You gotta love the
smarts and finality of the final effects sequence and Mel's
closing lines.
        This film boasts a dizzyingly high death total and most of
the deaths are courtesy of Porter. Still, we're supposed to "root
for the bad guy" and we certainly do.


Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Movie reviewers have an obligation to see the good, the bad, and
the despicable. I originally wrote this review for my college
newspaper back in '95, but I wanted to re-write it because not
all retro reviews should be about the classics. We need to be
warned about some truly awful films, too. This picture was so
bad, it inspired the description for my 1/10 rating (see ratings
chart below). The only thing saving it from a 0/10 rating is that
being able to rent a movie like this is slightly less embarassing
than renting a porno. So, it does indeed have some plusses...
In fairness, Elizabeth Berkley is certainly worth seeing in the
buff. And her ability to whine and irritate us, even while nude,
was appropriate in her role as selfish temptress Nomi Malone.
This character is not smart, not interesting, and (deliberately?)
far too annoying far too often. Like in 1998s "Bulworth", when
the movie was over I didn't care one little iota about the main
character. At least Warren Beatty tried to make a statement with
his dreary and overrated film, though. "Showgirls" is too stupid
to make a statement.
Some people claim that the story is based on the legendary "All
About Eve" of all things! If exploitation expert Joe Eszterhas
was half the screenwriter that Joseph L. Mankiewicz was, he'd
be...well, he'd be a good screenwriter. Instead, this project may
have sunk his career. He wrote the (HA HA!) script and the
usually reliable Paul Verhoeven directed. The same team who
created a GOOD sex-film in 1992 ("Basic Instinct") struck out
here with their occasional violence, gratuitous X-rated sex
scenes, and numerous (and quite unnecessary) lesbian overtones.
The predictable storyline revolves around Nomi streaking into Las
Vegas to make it big as a dancer. After the supposed street-smart
young "lady" gets conned out of her suitcase by a slack-jawed
yokel in the opening sequence, she befriends a tailor of the
glamorous stage production at the "Stardust Hotel". Nomi doesn't
take advantage of this contact to break into the big-time of
dirty dancing right away. First, she becomes a lap dancer at a
scummy strip club. She sells her hot little wares at "The
Cheetah" for a short time, turning on the fictitious customers
and the actual theatre audience. Hey, I never said she wasn't a
hot number...
Maybe it's that, her body, which gets her into the big-time when
the star of the "Stardust Hotel", Crystal Connors (Gina Gershon)
stops into the strip club (it certainly isn't her brains or
pleasant disposition!). Crystal requests a private lap dance for
her boyfriend (Kyle MacLachlan). He also happens to be the
pleasure-seeking worm who runs the big show. Crystal gets Nomi
onto the "Stardust" team and, after an interminable amount of
time, Nomi "earns" the role of Crystal's understudy. The slut
then deliberately injures and hospitalizes Crystal.
It was almost laughable that Nomi had the guts to claim that
she's "not a whore". That's a phrase we hear a few different
times and it's completely ludicrous. Of course she is! She sells
her soul to make it big, but in the end we're supposed to believe
that she's a better person than that. We're supposed to root for
her. No way! She's a tramp and a back-stabber who deserved
nothing--least of all vindication in the...ahem...climax. She is
not a good person and they take over two hours to explain that
the audience should think that she is.
The sub-plot with a male dancer (Glenn Plummer) who claims to see
talent in Nomi is just a gratuitous opportunity to let her dance
naked a little bit more. It sure ain't character development!
Plummer also appeared in "Speed" in '94 in a smaller, yet better
role. This sub-plot goes absolutely nowhere except maybe to
deliver an unsubtle hint that fornicators should practice birth
control.
Kyle MacLachlan must have been promised a big pay-day or his
standards have dipped since appearing in "Blue Velvet". That
picture was weird, but some critics claim it's one of the best
movies of the '80s. Now ol' Kyle can say that he acted in one of
the worst of the '90s, too. His sleazy character is important to
"Showgirls", but we don't learn anything about him. He uses
people to get what he wants, but that only means that he fits in
well with the other characters in this movie. Is he a villain?
Who cares!
Ultimately, this movie is as tiresome as it is explicit. Everyone
must know by now about the soft-core acts of copulation,
especially the riotous romp between Berkley and MacLachlan in his
pool. What few reviewers take issue with is how mean-spirited
this movie is. Everyone's either having sex, exacting revenge, or
WISHING they were having sex or exacting revenge. It's just too
hard to take (especially for over two hours). If we must be
exposed to the evils of the Vegas world, why couldn't Verhoeven
have also made a point of highlighting the whispers, grunts, and
other sounds during the dance numbers? It's hard to care about
these people if we can't even appreciate what they're capable of
doing on-stage.
Berkley may have a future in Hollywood because she can dance and
she has a great body. After all, the world of porn is still an
active, dishonourable profession. Perhaps Berkley could join
their ranks and leave the REAL acting to Pauly Shore and Cindy
Crawford. Oops, they're bad actors, too. Well, at least, they're
not selfish and contemptable like good ol' slutty Nomi Malone.
USELESS TRIVIA--Ironically, Elizabeth Berkley played virtuous and
"holier than thou" Jessie on the teeny-bopper TV show, "Saved By
The Bell", before breaking onto the big screen.


Title
Review for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is the 3rd of 5 retro reviews honouring great Jack
Nicholson films I plan to do in the next few weeks. "Chinatown" &
"A Few Good Men" are already posted on the Internet.)
What is crazy? "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" made a bold
statement addressing insanity. It took a little over two hours to
introduce its characters, set up a plot, and then let these great
actors work with a top-notch screenplay. After their job was done
and this film broke into theatres, we knew more about mental
hospitals, so-called "crazy" people, and how one man can change
the lives of others around him than we had known before. Watching
this great film nearly 30 years later reveals much, much more
than just Jack Nicholson playing a volatile free-spirit and
collecting an Oscar for it. There are more underlying themes and
ideas in this film than you can shake a big stick at. I'll get to
all those fascinating subtexts in a moment, but first, a little
about the story, if you please...
It's 1963 (according to a radio broadcast of the World Series)
and R.P. McMurphy (Jack Nicholson) has been relocated from the
local penitentiary to the state mental hospital. He's a known
malcontent serving out a jail sentence for statuatory rape of a
minor. Sent to the hospital for evaluation, the prison
authorities think that McMurphy has been faking insanity to get
out of work. He has an immediate impact on his fellow patients by
taking their money in numerous bets and disrupting regular ward
behaviour. McMurphy deliberately tries to anger Nurse Ratched
(Louise Fletcher) and even wagers with the other patients that he
can, essentially, make HER crazy. The icy-cold nurse doesn't
crack, but proves that her single goal in the hospital is to make
her patients crack. McMurphy brings out the rebelliousness in
everyone--little knowing most of them have nothing to lose
because they're voluntary patients--and pushes Nurse Ratched to
take drastic measures to bring him in line.
"One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" has a limited musical score.
The music in this film nicely complements the story, yet never
interferes with the steady stream of superb dialogue. This is not
a big technical film, but Forman used sound and lighting well
considering that he had a confined area and so many actors to
photograph on film. This picture didn't win any technical awards,
but no one was crying about that on Oscar Night. It was the
second of three movies--"It Happened One Night" and "The Silence
Of The Lambs" are the others--to win the Top 5 Academy Awards for
Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best
(Adapted) Screenplay.
Nicholson and Fletcher won Best Actor and Best Actress Oscars for
their fine work, but the supporting cast was equally good.
William Redfield plays Dale Harding, an intelligent man who
cannot handle his wife's beauty and suspects that she's cheating
on him. Billy Bibbit (Brad Dourif in an Oscar-nominated
performance) is a young man with a tremendous lack of confidence
and a terrible stutter brought on by his mother's
overprotectiveness. Chief Bromden (Will Sampson) is thought to be
a deaf and dumb Indian until we learn that he has his own demons
which only McMurphy's influence can help him overcome.
Christopher Lloyd--in his underrated film debut--plays Taber, one
of the few committed patients on the ward and the one guy who
knows that everyone is full of it (I had to edit that last word
by six letters!). Danny DeVito, Sydney Lassick, and Vincent
Schiavelli are also solid. Milos Forman's Oscar-winning direction
is excellent and the adaptation of Ken Kesey's fine novel by Bo
Goldman and Lawrence Hauben also won a well-deserved trophy.
So, having laid out the groundwork, it's now time to analyze this
film to death. The obvious place to begin is with the "crazy"
factor. McMurphy says, "I must be crazy to be in a looney-bin
like this". Of course, the thrust of the film is that McMurphy is
the only one who ISN'T insane because he understands that he's
screwed up, but no more than the average person on the street. He
just wants to be free and tries to show the other men that they
have a right to be free too. Only the committed patients--Chief
and Taber--can truly understand why McMurphy wants to be free.
They don't want to be there, but aren't permitted to leave. They
can't sympathize with men who are too weak to face the outside
world when it's only a few steps away. So, watch the last scene
carefully and see which characters are highlighted--Chief and
Taber.
Of course, the voluntary patients aren't going anywhere because
of the presence of one of the very best screen villains
ever--Nurse Ratched. She destroys men rather than building them
up or trying to cure them. Her means of therapy is to humiliate
and expose weakness, then coldly and calmly break a man's spirit.
She's the proof that if you don't play the "game", then the
system will run right over you. Nurse Ratched has men in her iron
grasp and does whatever she has to do to keep them there. Even
the doctors take her advice--or is it that they obey her
commands?--against their own judgment. If it's threatening Billy
with the wrath of his mother or treating Cheswick (Sydney
Lassick) like a child, Nurse Ratched works on them until they
become her little puppies. No treatment--from shock therapy to
lobotomy--is too rash, no tactic is unfair. She's hateful. Her
hair looks like horns, implying that she's a devil twisting these
poor men into obedient servants of her rules.
This film was politically correct before that annoying phrase was
cool. Perhaps its "PC"ness was unintentional, but think about it.
There are representations from the black community (the
attendants) from the Asian community (one of the doctors) from
the Native American community (Will Sampson as Chief) and even
from the short community (Danny DeVito). The one representation
that comes across in a negative light is women. Either they're
domineering witches in white outfits (the nurses) or they're
bimbos (McMurphy's not-so-virtuous lady friends). But then again,
this film is told from the overpowered man's point of view. While
the women are shown as either sex objects or tyrants, it's a
necessarily harsh depiction to make the story work.
Speaking of sex objects, "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is
chock-full of sexual overtones, homoeroticism, rape themes, and
double entendres. Harding has sexual issues with his wife while
patients Sefelt & Fredrickson have a subtle "relationship". There
are even smoldering sexual overtones between McMurphy and Nurse
Ratched. It's like the bitter rivals are playing a game to see
who can make the other one blink. However, the hinting of sex in
THEIR relationship is violent. When he attacks Nurse Ratched, it
could be taken as a rape. In keeping with the rape theme, Billy
claims that the others (led by McMurphy) forced him to sleep with
Candy, one of McMurphy's lady friends who sneaks into the
hospital. In truth, Billy IS pushed into the room after trying to
weasel out of the "date" which implies that he was raped. And, of
course, McMurphy was put in jail for rape in the first place.
This picture has some great subtleties. McMurphy starts out
wearing his own clothes, but gradually he dresses like all the
rest, wearing a complete hospital-issued outfit. In fact, this is
a sterile evironment where everything is white and bland. Only
McMurphy's spark can bring any colour into their lives. Another
humourous subtlety is when McMurphy names his fellow patients as
doctors while on an unscheduled fishing trip, except for rival
Harding (who is called "Mr. Harding"). It's a quick insult, but a
good one. Some of their names have hidden relevance too.
McMurphy's initials are R.P.M. which is also an abbreviation in
measuring velocity and speed. McMurphy is certainly a man who
moves quickly. St-st-stuttering Billy Bibbit's name even sounds
like a stutter. Harding's name becomes "Hard On" to McMurphy,
which implies something fairly obvious. And the final subtlety is
that in a film about men interacting with each other, there is an
appropriate amount of swearing--not too much, just right. 
Coming out in 1975, which was shortly after the Vietnam conflict,
this film about men failing to adjust to society was timely. Men
were coming back from the failure in Vietnam and many of them had
great difficulties adjusting to a "sane" society. Like "The
Exorcist" this film makes a perfect allegorical reference to the
Vietnam hangover. And, in the film AND in the flop known as
Vietnam, not even true democracy can win because a higher power
is calling all the shots. President Nixon pressed on despite
powerful opposition and Nurse Ratched follows rules so
stringently that she feels compelled to disallow a majority vote
to change the ward's TV policy because "the meeting was
adjourned". And keeping on the political kick, Milos Forman, who
suffered Czechoslovakian dictatorship, appreciates freedom. He
used it as the driving force in "The People Vs. Larry Flynt" and
in this picture. It works too. The main characters in both films
are sympathetic and interesting, if not particularly wholesome.
The greatest message of all in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest"
is that humanity and freedom can conquer all adversity. Even if
it takes a symbolic gesture to free your spirit (Chief supplies
that gesture in the end), not conforming to unreasonable rules
and finding the courage to live life your own way is the most
important belief of all. Even doomed Billy had one great moment.
Even though his stutter comes back worse than ever when Nurse
Ratched rains on his parade, he had that one moment. This picture
is funny enough and compelling enough to rip your emotions in
half and LIKE that your emotions are being ripped in half. It's
impossible not to cheer along with them in the imaginary baseball
game sequence or when they score their first two points while
playing the attendants in a game of basketball. They experience
pure joy and the euphoria they feel is contagious. McMurphy
raises a ruckus of epic proportions and, while the other patients
don't seem to be affected outwardly in the final few moments, he
has indeed made a significant impact on their lives. Jack
Nicholson sure did fly "over the cuckoo's nest" and won his first
Oscar for playing a man who tries to be free. As McMurphy said,
"At least I did that".
USELESS TRIVIA--Academy Award-winning producers of "One Flew Over
The Cuckoo's Nest", Saul Zaentz and Michael Douglas, have also
won Oscars for other films. Zaentz took home Best Picture honours
for "Amadeus" and "The English Patient" while Douglas won Best Actor for 
"Wall Street".
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Cobb (1994)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The name Ty Cobb inspired fear and loathing in the hearts of
every Major League baseball player in the early 1900s. The
Detroit Tigers' star would do absolutely anything to win
(including deliberately injuring his opponents) and he hated
everyone but himself. He considered every turn at bat an act of
war against the pitcher. If an infielder tried to tag Ty Cobb
sliding into a base, they would get a razor-sharp spike stuck in
their chest. He was a mean bastard, but nice guys finish last and
villains finish first. Right? Well, they do! After all, Cobb was
the first man inducted into the Major League Baseball Hall Of
Fame. He's also the greatest baseball player of all time,
including the immortal Babe Ruth. 
Tommy Lee Jones was perfectly cast as Cobb. Coming off
Oscar-nominated performances in 1991 ("JFK") and 1993 ("The
Fugitive", for which he won the supporting trophy), Jones is a
man's man. He even resembles the crusty ballplayer. Ironically,
"Cobb" is a bio-pic about a baseball star, but it shows us very
little baseball action. Of course, all of the action that IS
shown is in flashback because Cobb is about 70 years old. Jones
looks good in both the flashback footage and in the decrepit old
man scenes. The man with the highest lifetime batting average was
always secure in his own abilities. Cobb has a great line in the
picture when he's asked by a guy how he would hit against the
pitchers of "today". Cobb responds that he would still hit about
.280, but we have to remember that he's almost 70 years old! The
jerk sure WAS confident.
Robert Wuhl, a sports freak in real life, co-stars as legendary
sports writer Al Stump. He sits around drinking with his cronies,
each of them boasting about writing a book. No one follows up on
it until Cobb phones Stump and asks him to write his biography.
Stump agrees, but soon regrets his decision. He threatens to quit
working with the drunken, gun-slinging, skirt-chasing old man
more than once. But he never does (or this movie would have been
awful short!) and they go on an odyssey of discovery.
The movie takes a "Scent Of A Woman" turn when Cobb forces Stump
to travel to Las Vegas against his will to find some women. On
the way, they pick up a Cobb nemesis, who just happens to be a
black man. Since Cobb is a racist, their discussions about
baseball are biased. The black man claims that Josh Gibson and
Satchel Paige (who starred in the Negro Leagues) were the
greatest players ever. Cobb disagrees vehemently, refusing to
admit that anyone who didn't play for his team, the Detroit
Tigers, are even worth mentioning.
Later, this turns into a "buddy" film. Cobb and Stump become
reluctant friends. It's apparent that they're going to stay
together until one of them dies. But even though they grudgingly
become chums, they clash about the content of the biography.
Stump wants it to be about the ballplayer's outrageous personal
life. He wants to describe the outlandish things Cobb does in his
old age and Cobb is viciously opposed to that viewpoint. He
demands that the book stick to baseball. Stump writes his own
version of the book when Cobb isn't around and must wrestle with
his conscience. Should he tell the world about how much of a
sonofabitch this man was (and still is) or shouldn't he?
Tommy Lee Jones is the whole show here. He gives a necessarily
overbearing performance. He's crazy in the beginning of the film
and just as lonely and crazy in the end. The script had its holes
though, which prevents the movie from soaring above its
weaknesses. Wuhl does a fine job opposite the bitter old man, but
he's not the reason to rent this video. Jones proved that he is a
world-class performer when he won his Best Supporting Actor the
year before and continued to show that with "Cobb". We don't see
much on-field material, except in the opening newsreel, but even
that is just enough action in this character study of the
greatest player to ever strap on a baseball uniform.
USELESS TRIVIA--Disgraced baseball great Pete Rose has also
played Ty Cobb (in a TV movie about Babe Ruth). Rose appeared in
a scene with Stephen Lang (Ruth) in a motel room. Rose, who is
banned from baseball, is not permitted to wear a uniform even in
a movie.


Title
Review for Barton Fink (1991)
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Captivated fans of the Oscar-winning "Fargo" would be remiss if
they didn't rent a 1991 beauty called "Barton Fink". Directed by
Joel Coen, produced by his brother Ethan, and written by both of
them, this '91 gem epitomizes the fresh, original style and
substance that movies can showcase.
Taking a delicious stab at the Hollywood film industry, the Coens
seem to be parodying vintage Hollywood or even Billy Wilder's
masterpiece, "Sunset Blvd."! Featuring superior set design,
fantastic cinematography, meticulous detail, and great acting,
this picture (set in 1941) sets a high standard of intelligence
and manages to keep the two-hour story at that level throughout.
Some critics might sniff at the bizarre plot-turns--and they
certainly are weird--but those twists add flavour, not blandness.
John Turturro (a Coen regular) plays Barton Fink, a New York
playwright hired by Capital Pictures to pen a wrestling script.
Moving to a seedy hotel in Los Angeles, Fink sets out to write
the story. He receives both beratings and praises from the
producer (Michael Lerner in a Oscar-nominated supporting
performance) while trying to find that all-important
'inspiration'. It seems that he has a rough case of writer's
block and whenever he seems ready to put something on paper, he's
interrupted by his neighbour Charlie Meadows (John Goodman).
However, don't believe what you see because this film is full of
metaphors. Let's just say that Goodman is well-cast as a
buffoonish travelling salesman.
In his travails, Fink also "meets" a revered writer, W.P. Mayhew,
(John Mahoney) and his wife, Audrey (Judy Davis). Mayhew has
become a pathetic souse and Audrey is the true author of many of
her husband's creations. Fink invites Audrey to his dilapidated
hotel room to work on his "failing" script. From this point on,
things take that weird turn I mentioned above. If there is a
weakness to this movie, it would have to be that things become a
little crazy. Meadows is revealed as serial killer "Madman Muntz"
and takes the script to strange new places. I'm going to stop
giving away the story though. This is one of those, "make of it
what you will" sort of films, where not everything is as it
seems.
Contained within are some of the niftiest twists, smartest jokes,
and juiciest plot lines shown in this decade. A technical
delight, "Barton Fink" has every sort of efficient use of
lighting, camera angles, editing, and the trademark Coen
attention to detail. In the climax, the film combines special
effects, long camera lenses, and great dialogue. A fine subtlety
was the highway-length hotel hallway with faint wind sounds
creeping below. No fancy explosions or computer graphics need
apply here. "Barton Fink" proves that a good script can still be
written in Tinseltown.
After the first viewing, some of the material whooshed over my
head, but the gist of the tale brilliantly parodies film-making,
angst-ridden (Woody Allen-ish) writers, and the strange decade of
the '40s. With solid, sometimes snickeringly sensational
supporting performances by Steve Buscemi, Jon Polito, Richard
Portnow, and Christopher Murney, this is a dead-on lampoon.
Portnow and Murney portray detectives with the utmost of
silliness in their parody of the '40s film noir/cop movie genre.
Of course, Michael Lerner is the scene-stealer and he was
nominated for an Academy Award for his fine work.
The Coen brothers have done two great films in their
careers--"Fargo" and the vastly underrated "Miller's Crossing".
"Barton Fink" is a shade below that level, but only a shade. This
is the kind of film that doesn't sit well with the
Godzilla-loving movie-going public in the late '90s, but REAL
movie fans will discover a gem in this piece of work. Rent this
film soon and enter Barton's living hell.
USELESS TRIVIA--John Turturro appeared in a small, hilarious role
in 1998's "The Big Lebowski" as Jesus the flamboyant bowler. The
Coen brothers use Turturro, Goodman, Buscemi, and others quite
regularly--a rare sort of loyalty in Hollywood today.

