Authors
Bernard Dy
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Flashback (1990)
     Flashback stars Dennis Hopper and Kiefer Sutherland in a story which
mirrors the current "male-bonding cop stories" but gives the viewer just a
little more to think about.
     Hopper is Hewey Walker, a stalwart rebel of the 1960's who was put in jail
for political crimes.  Sutherland is John Buckner, an unshakeable FBI agent
who is assigned to escort Walker to another site.  For the first part of the
film, these two characters work very well, Hopper using style and body language
to give the viewer a good picture of the loose and somewhat crazed Walker.  He
constantly hazes and teases Buckner as he tries to get under his skin.  These
scenes are enjoyable, but are terribly reminiscent of another film called
MIDNIGHT RUN.  
     As the story progresses, Walker succeeds in breaking down Buckner's hard
shell, and in a quick sweep (I'll leave the details out), switches places with
Buckner.  Walker now wears the conservative suit and tie, and is clean shaven,
while Buckner is stuck with the old jeans and jacket.  It is part of Walker's
great escape plan.  However, before Walker can get away clean, he and Buckner
both get caught up in a corrupt county sheriff's plans, and basically end up on
his death list.  
     In fleeing from the sheriff, the two characters learn to work together,
and each shares his secrets, and learns of the other's.  In the end, Walker
finds himself catching up with the times, and actually breaking the rules of
the counter-culture community by catering to the pursuit of money, while
Buckner discovers a latent love for his past involvement with the
counter-culture.  
     What makes this film work is the message which it develops throughout its
run.  In Walker's own words: "The 90's will make the 80's look like the 50's of
the 60's."  The difference between this movie and its similar counterparts,
MIDNIGHT RUN and TRADING PLACES (amongst others), is the background material
and historical validity which come with it.  Like most of Hopper's work, it
requires the audience to think with their brain, and not just with their eyes,
about what is being said.  Hopper himself is the key to making this picture
better than its predecessors, not only as an actor, but as a creator as well.  
     On the down side, while I found the movie and its messages entertaining, I
didn't find them particularly valuable (versus PLATOON, BORN ON THE FOURTH OF
JULY, BREAKING AWAY, THE BIG EASY, or other Hopper films: RIDERS OF THE STORM
and HOOSIERS).  This is definitely lighter Hopper fare, and it's a fun film 
which is probably what it was intended to be in the first place.  The ending
was just too pat and sweet for me.  
     You get the idea in the first 20 minutes that Hopper is really having  fun
playing Walker.  Not a top ten film, by any means, but worth the price of 
admission especially if you're a Hopper fan.  Of course, it is loads better
than the standard Hollywood garbage.
