Authors
Thomas Glebe
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Patch Adams (1998)
Lately, it has become my custom to see "recent" releases long after they
first come out.  There are many reasons for this.  I don't like crowds,
I don't like off screen noise (from crowds) when I'm trying to enjoy
what's on screen, and these days, I resent paying seven or eight dollars
(or more?!) to see a flick.  The practice of seeing movies on the big
screen like this however, hasn't really affected my overall opinions;
that is, the "hype" and/or critical praise, or downturned thumbs and
critical blasting, haven't made a difference.  I saw "Titanic" awhile
after release and felt the praise it received well justified.  The
opposite was true for me personally with Spielberg's "Saving Private
Ryan."  Call me an iconoclast, but the opinions of others rarely affects
me at all when it comes to movies.
With this in mind, the totally wacky bipolar reactions that "Patch
Adams" had received by the time I got around to it (audiences loved it,
critics trashed it), made me curious enough to cough up my $3.25 to see
it at a bargain theater on a warm, sunny Saturday afternoon.   I didn't
expect much and entered the theater reluctantly.  I was not really a
Robin Williams fan (or wasn't until this, which has since made me go
back and look at his other work with more favor), the subject matter
didn't seem to interest me too greatly, and if this were really the
"bomb" most of the critics were saying it was, I was about to waste two
hours and the price of a happy meal.  Several  thoughts entered my mind
as I sat down in my usual third row middle seat down front in the nearly
deserted theater and the lights dimmed.  I had read mostly negative
reviews of this film, and yet, it had been a big moneymaker, audiences
loved it,  and it was nominated for a Golden Globe as best picture of
the year.  "Best Picture?!"  How could a movie that was condemned so
harshly by the critics, be all that bad if the movie goers themselves
loved it?   Something seemed strange about that, I thought, as the movie
beganvery strange.
Take note, all.  The critics on this one are totally full of shit.  This
is a wonderful film!
I was swept away by this film, almost from the very beginning.  The
opening scene and voice-over narrative by Robin Williams set me up
nicely with its very solemn and philosophical tone, and the visuals and
music nicely countered that in a very enticing manner.  For here we were
introduced to a sad, depressed man on his way to the "nut house" after a
failed suicide attempt, riding through some of the most beautiful, sunny
countryside one can imagine.  I wonder if the powerful, dialectic nature
of this opening scene and narration, was actually the moment when the
"critics" were already annoyed, but the audience (ahem, like real
people, you know?), could immediately identify with William's character
and plight?  Despite the movie's frequent excursions into over the top
silliness and improbable behavior by Williams and various other
characters later on, the beginning is really the most manipulative part
of the film (and I mean that in the most positive sense).  Only now do I
realize why so many reviewers hated this flick.  One really has to
understand Patch's whole state of mind at the start, to identify with
him throughout and find the rest of the movie enjoyable, plausible and
meaningful.  In essence, even at our lowest moments in life, truly the
"best medicine," like the movie's tag-line goes, is humor.  It is my
firm opinion after seeing this extraordinary film, that most of those
who didn't like it, simply didn't "get" it, from the very beginning.
Either that, or that piece of their hearts that can still revel in the
glory and power of the simple pleasures in this great big mysterious
"concept" we're all sharing called "life," is in cardiac arrest, and
needs exactly the type of "medical care" Patch preaches after quickly
learning during his brief stay at the psycho ward, is scarcely present
in our modern day medical institutions.
Those institutions, as Patch strongly believes and within which the
movie's whole concept relies on for its very real truths, are truly a
daily, functioning contradiction.  On the one hand, hospitals and
doctors have as their guiding principle (or so they say), the noblest of
goals.  To treat people in need, to care for the sick and for those
without the means to care for themselves, and to acknowledge that we are
all basically just human beings living out our lives together in a
"society" where the "Golden Rule" is actually the only one which
matters.  But who, if they've been run through the impersonal, HMO
horror that is the state of today's "medical care," who, if they've ever
spent any amount of time "in the hospital," would agree with the notion
that "altruistic" and "loving" care is any part of the present day
health care "system?"  That system is a lie, a contradiction, and in
many cases today, the whole concept of "medical care" is an oxymoron of
the highest order.
"Patch Adams" is truly a "socialist" movie on this issue, dwelling
gloriously and unashamedly from start to finish, in the concept of
"socialized medicine," where people are truly put first and foremost in
importance.  I really think this film could not have been made during
earlier times, notably during the 50's and the whole McCarthy
witch-hunt/blacklist days.  Sadly, if the medical "industry" continues
on the track it has been, films like this and the ideas within, will be
rarer still.  Only but the most cold-hearted cynic about life and the
sanctity of that, and those who consider the medical profession as just
another "business," could deny that increasing the "personalizing" of
the doctor-patient relationship, could do anything but positive things.
 Old habits and customs, old traditions and ways of thinking die hard
however.  Is the "philosophy" of Dr. Hunter "Patch" Adams really all
that bizarre or unworkable?  Or is it just a return, if only in spirit
and intent, to the "good old days" when a doctor would actually get his
butt over to your house and tend to your sick child because he gave a
damn?  Having read many other reviews of this film, it is my suspicion
that those who denounced this film the strongest, simply find the
politics of it something to be reacted against, instead of understood
and embraced.
Those "critics" who have damned this film so roughly I think, are
playing the most politically correct game possible these days, and that
is that any ideas and ideals even remotely related to "socialist"
thought or political persuasion, is by default, especially these days,
quite un-chic.  Why then, did this movie find such a wide audience and
enjoy such basic, heartfelt "people" popularity?  I've yet to meet one
other "real" person out there who has seen the film and not loved it,
but why the snotty, stuck-up reviews, which seem to me to not even be
discussing the same movie?  Can the answer also be found in politics,
but ones of money?  After all, anyone out there who is not wealthy, who
cannot afford the finest medical care available today, who has seen
firsthand that the last place to find true health in mind and spirit
these days is the inside of a hospital or clinic, and who more often
than not in real life has run into the same cold, inhuman "healers"
(doctors) that this film shows fictionally, "gets" the movie's message
loud and clear.  Doesn't wealth in this country buy a different kind of
health care?  Could it be that the majority of "Hollywood" and industry
"critics" have a standard of health care all of us "commoners" out there
(who loved the film) only dream of?  Perhaps.
What touched audiences besides these possible factors?  Do all of us
normal people (who can't afford Mayo for every sneeze or bout of
heartburn) get the idea that there's something dreadfully wrong with the
medical system we have today, and that it needs change, almost any
change, and needs it now?  Does the whole idea of experimentation, of at
least trying to do things a better and more humane way, resonate deeply
in the majority of us, who fall through the cracks when it comes to the
medical "state of the art" these days?  In an early part of the film, a
psychiatrist who is supposed to be "helping" Patch and at the very
least, "listening" to him, fiddles around with his coffee, avoids eye
contact, and eventually doesn't even hear what Patch says.  A bit later,
Patch opts to dismiss himself from the institution, for the obvious
reason that he's just not getting any true medical help there.  The
psychiatrist, ego puffed up, tells Patch that he disagrees with the
early release, and that after all, "he" is the doctor.  In a wonderful,
fleeting, but subtly powerful moment, Patch replies, "Yeah, but you suck
at it."  Patch can, and does, do better.
The truth is, for all the pitfalls and possible impracticalities of some
of Patch's "methods," almost anything would be better than the medical
system we have today.  In a broader sense, the dichotomy between the
majority of critic's almost snobbish rejection of this movie and its
general philosophy of life, and its popular acceptance, is a comment on
these modern times themselves.  The elite and the prosperous and the
media tell us one thing, but most of us are not really as ignorant as
all of that.  As in the uptight and virtually fascist 50's, there are
two realities we are all living in.  Patch Adams was/is clearly ahead of
his time, but so were Jesus, Ghandi, and Martin Luther King.  The
magical part of this movie to me is that for all the protestations of
the fuddy-duddy uptight bureaucrats and status-hungry money-grubbers
(doctors, deans, and medical students) Patch fights along the way, most
of his "methods" are virtually cost-free, extremely effective and
healing, and any real "reasons" for not giving them a try, are totally
without substance.
Every now and then it seems to me, a movie like this comes along, which
the critics roll over the hot coals, and the audience shakes their heads
in remembering their fond enjoyment.  The film reminded me of many of my
favorite movies of the past along the general "theme" celebrating the
wisdom and morality of the common, caring individual caught up in a
crazy world, including "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Next," "Forrest
Gump," and  "The Grapes of Wrath."  Over the top and bordering on
pretentious at times, "Patch Adams" is not without its flaws, but its
heart is squarely in the right place, and so is the heart of the
true-life man the movie is based upon.  I recall (the late) Siskel and
Ebert, who I admired for the most part and agreed with on most films,
taking "Patch" to task bitterly, almost "over the top" in their own
acrimonious criticism, and have found the same negative "spirit" in
almost every other critic who has cursed this movie.  An interesting
phenomenon, this "over-reaction" I think.  "Patch Adams" sneaked up on
Hollywood I think, and sneaked up in the hearts of those who let its
message in.  Siskel and Ebert asked at one point in their scathing
condemnation, something like "would you want a doctor to be tending to
you like Patch Adams?"  Speaking for myself, yes.  Call me
"old-fashioned," or just a bloody socialist agitator, but the whole
concept of a doctor looking into your eyes once in awhile, seems
strangely appealing.
Regardless of whether the most cynical among us want to reject the
sentimental and unabashed sincerity of this film's message and spirit by
attacking the messenger, "Patch Adams" obviously reached out past them,
to the appreciative audience, the common folk who the real doctor Adams
would be glad to sit and talk with, like any two human beings should.  I
think this movie should be required viewing at all of this country's
medical schools, and if the students, like the critics, don't "get it,"
they should have to watch it again and again until they do.  The
"message" here is clear, even if some, including the Hollywood
establishment itself who failed to include this as a best picture
nominee (as glaring an omission as I've seen in years), still don't "get
it."  The people do.  The "patients" out there do.  As one of them,
that's good enough for me.
In another early part of the film, one of the "patients" in the
psychiatric hospital Patch meets, an aging, "crazy" but brilliant former
mathematician, holds up four fingers, asking Patch "How many fingers do
you see?"  Patch answers four.  The old man grumbles angrily, saying,
"No, no, no, look beyond the fingers, tell me how many do you see?"
Only a bit later, as Patch begins to realize that he has just as much
healing power inside himself as anything or anyone outside of him, he
repeats the same experiment with the old man, looks beyond the obvious,
the man's four outstretched fingers, and sees "ghost" fingers right next
to them.  "I see eight fingers," Patch laughs.  His heart is opening,
he's beginning to truly "see."  He "gets it."  A trick of the eye.  A
trick of the heart.  Simple but sublime.  One of many such clear lessons
in a film as deep and meaningful as one wishes to make it in their own
heart.  It helps a lot I think, to view "Patch Adams" with an open one.
 A tricky thing this day and age, as evidenced by the majority of
critics out there, who hated a film the "people" loved.  Like a doctor
can always learn a thing or two from a patient (such a revolutionary
idea, let's ban it!), maybe the critics ought to sit up and take notice
of something they've obviously intentionally tried to forget in viewing
and reviewing this great little film, the "audience is never wrong."
Finally, always second guessing even myself in my initial reactions to
movies, especially those seen on the big screen, then later otherwise, I
recently had the chance to see "Patch" again, this time on cable tv.
Amazing, once again.  I had only turned it on to watch the beginning
again.  I couldn't switch channels, and ended up watching the whole
thing again, again, feeling all the same emotions.  I laughed, I cried,
I felt that wonderful tingle up my spine in so many parts.  A great
filmand the critics be damned.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
For the first time in a long time, I was literally blown away by a
movie. I don't actually see movies in theaters that often, for various
reasons, and it's actually been over a year since I saw a film on the
big screen. I had heard for months all the hype about this movie, and
I'm not much for hype in general, but ALL the hype about this particular
film is justified. It is simply put, a stunning cinematic masterpiece. 
The last time I had such overwhelmingly positive emotions (and a lot of
intellectual ones also) about a film was when I saw "Forrest Gump" for
the first time, although the "experience" of seeing "Titanic" went much
further. I recall feeling so strongly positive towards only two other
films in my life after seeing them initially, and those moments were
after seeing "Apocalypse Now" back in 1980 and "Close Encounters" back
in 1977. "Titanic" is an instant top-ten for me, and that's saying a
lot, since my list of all time favorites numbers somewhere near 1000
films. I had to fight tears several times during this movie, and the end
was simply overwhelming. In a weird sort of way, though I had no idea
exactly how the film WOULD end, it lived up to my actual hopes of how it
SHOULD end. In fact, the last few moments of "Titanic" are probably the
most poignant and fervent ones I've ever experienced in ANY film. 
I would be shocked that anyone could watch the end, and NOT have an
extremely moving personal reaction, unless perhaps their blood was
indeed pure Vulcan, and "emotion" was a concept they did not understand.
What's so amazing about the end, and other such moments throughout the
film, is that for all of its budget (over $200 million) and hype, in
many ways, this is a very "personal" film from director James Cameron
(Terminator 2, The Abyss, Aliens, etc.), and never do the eye-popping
special effects (of which there are plenty) get in the way of the very
special "love story" being told. That utterly and unashamedly romantic
aspect, despite what some may think of such a blockbuster "disaster"
movie, is at the heart of "Titanic," and it is as powerful, convincing,
and passionate, as the actual representation of the sinking of the ship,
which only begins halfway through the movie itself. One may think that
the real pleasures to be had are in seeing some of that (well spent)
money up there on screen in the form of such state-of-the-art effects,
and that one might feel a bit bored or cheated UNTIL those parts come. 
But the truth is, the first half of the movie, which has nothing to do
with the sinking, is JUST as hypnotic and gripping, as the latter half.
In fact, even if the ship had not sank, and Cameron had simply told us
the love story of Jack ((Leonardo DiCaprio) and Rose (Kate Winslet),
completely uninterrupted by the tragedy which we all know beforehand IS
coming, this STILL would've been a great film. In other words, for all
the power and spectacle of the film after the ship hits the iceberg (the
second half), the first half is no less compelling and involving for the
viewer. Add the two together, and what you've basically got is over
three hours of absolutely spellbinding entertainment. To see "Titanic"
in a way, is not so much like watching a movie, as it is to "experience"
the best that cinema can possibly offer. "Suspension of disbelief" kicks
easily in some 10 minutes into the film, and for over three hours, one
is literally "experiencing" a whole other reality. The length of the
movie seems quite short, in this respect. It is THAT good. 
I will not attempt to summarize the plot here (ship sails, ship sinks,
okay?), to list various technical aspects of the production, nor even
dwell on the historical event this fictional film uses as a backdrop for
the story it tells. Such information can be found elsewhere. What I
would like to do is simply share my own individual feelings and
reactions, after having been so astonished by a movie. As it has already
won so many awards and plaudits, and has already become the most
popular film ever made (at least in terms of money earned), I know that
my own reaction is not an isolated one. It has been said that a helluva
lot of money went into advertising this movie, but this could've easily
been saved. For in all ways, this is a word-of-mouth film if there ever
were one. Once you've seen it, once you've been blown away by it, you
can't wait to share that reaction with others. THIS is what made
"Titanic" so popular, why it has earned so much money and applause. I am
certain that millions were/are enthusiastically saying basically the
same thing to their friends and family, after seeing the film for the
first time. "I've just seen one of the most wonderful films ever, let me
tell you about it"
I went in expecting to be kind of disappointed, but left in a daze. The
movie was a real thrill on so many levels. At this length, it was
consistently fascinating and moving, never a lapse of interest at any
time. The technical qualities are impossible to describe. Cameron takes
the viewer ON the ship. Everything is as real and detailed as one could
get, and the final hour and a half of the ship's sinking is really just
as frightening and real as if you were there. The film's techniques are
just so extraordinary. There are at least a dozen different little
points which are totally unexpected, and done so fluidly and
beautifully. For instance, during the middle of this extended scene of
havoc and confusion near the end when the ship is going down, Cameron
throws in this short little ten second snip which shows the ship very
tiny all alone on the dark ocean, with the stars shining above, in
totally calm waters, and it shoots off this little meaningless flare.
For all its glory and mammoth proportions, at that moment, this
technological wonder (even by today's standards) of man's creative
abilities, is seen as totally impotent and meaningless when compared to
nature.  Then there's another short scene where the camera does this
massive and continuous sweep from a close up of the front of the ship,
all the way above and down the length of it, past it, and behind it. How
this was done, one can only guess. Computers and money? Still, the
overall effect, given the sweeping romantic moment this one single shot
deals with, is simply staggering. 
There are moments such as these throughout the picture however. When the
101 year old woman (Rose, who tells her story via flashback) is first
shown video of the sunken ship's remains by the crew of a salvage ship
in present day, her aged, feeble hand reaches out to the television
monitor, and she gasps with emotion. The crew of this salvage ship, who
are basically greedy and unsympathetic to the plight of the ship's
passengers and their real ordeal, do not really understand the emotion
Rose feels. They show her a brief computer simulation of how the ship
sank, and are all quite casual and flippant about her experiences and
memories. At one point, the captain of the ship asks her to tell them
her own story, then interrupts her almost immediately.  She sternly
looks at him, and says something like, "Do you want to hear my story or
not?" As if being scolded by an elder, the captain and the rest remain
quiet, and Rose begins reminiscing.  Cameron does a slow zoom into the
very eye of the woman, and soon we are transported back to England, in
1912, at the launching of the ship. Surely, this technique has been used
before, but never so powerfully and effectively. 
When the ship does finally get under way, the scenes of the interior of
the engine room, are equally remarkable. Though nature will eventually
have her way with this technological invention, one easily gets the
feeling that, at the time, this ship was the height of mankind's
industrial age achievement. Massive gears and pistons of iron and steel
move and roar on multi-leveled decks, and white-hot boiler rooms filled
with sweating, muscular men shoveling coals, give the viewer the clear
impression that the notion of this, mankind's most intricate and
complicated mechanical accomplishment, was truly "unsinkable." These
interior engine scenes are quite powerful, as they immediately establish
a sense of the immense nature of the ship with the audience, and at the
same time, create an empathetic and identifying camaraderie with the
characters and their state of mind throughout the rest of the film. The
opulent and lavish sets onboard and the marvelous camera techniques
sweeping gloriously and continuously throughout the film, also add to
this instant audience identification and sympathy. For at all times,
Cameron is totally successful at creating a totally realistic
atmosphere. So much so, that when the ship does finally start to
flounder, the shock and disbelief which must have bewildered and
traumatized those onboard, is equally shared by the viewer. By this time
however, there is an added element, the love story between Jack and
Rose. We are caught up so totally in that also, that the coming,
inevitable catastrophe seems all that more effective. I fully believe
this was Cameron's intent all along, in devoting so much of the movie to
the romantic allegory. Great care was obviously taken to make this
aspect as mesmerizing as possible, so that the audience would feel that
they were not just watching a demonstration of the physical disaster
itself, but a very personal glimpse into the real lives of real people
who lost their lives so unexpectedly. In this sense, for all the praise
and acclaim the special effects of "Titanic" has received (all fully
deserved), without the extra care and touches Cameron devotes to the
story and characters, this film would've easily sunk at the box office
more quickly than the ship itself. Throughout, Cameron's techniques seem
flawless. It really does seem as if every piece of film, every scene,
was carefully shot and edited in as stirring a manner as possible. In
addition, James Horner's brilliant music (in many different styles to
boot) gives virtually every scene, regardless of the content, extra
depth, feeling, and romance. 
The movie is fascinating and completely involving from start to finish
and even its three hour plus length is something almost unnoticed,
unless one has to go to the bathroom half way into it.  In this sense,
since there is no intermission, I suggest all DO this before entering
the theater.  Only a few minutes in however, one is easily caught up in
the characters, the suspense, the beauty of the cinematography and sets,
and the lavish and achingly romantic theme throughout.  One can use all
the premium adjectives--"extraordinary," "spectacular," "breathtaking,"
and so forth to discuss the sinking, which is virtually done in real
time (another achievement of the film), but mere words can ever come
close to explicitly describing the awesome visuals of watching the
Titanic take its final plunge. The effects utilized to depict this seem
totally real, virtually indistinguishable from the scenes on board in
various interior locations. As is typical from beginning to end, Cameron
obviously took great care to interweave various shots into an almost
seamless whole, imparting upon nearly each shot a balance and semiotic
completeness which only adds gloriously to the story, the motivations
and emotions of the various characters, and the true meaning of the
historical event itself. Though the story of Jack and Rose is
undoubtedly almost entirely fictional, Cameron's film is a tribute to
the real survivors in a very real way, for by concentrating so much on
the characters in addition to the technical aspects, he has beautifully
ingrained in the viewer that this tragedy involved more than just this
technological behemoth's collapse, it involved real people. By its end,
we have come to care for such people as almost real, not just as
fictional movie characters.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the movie, which previous films on
the subject have seemed to overlook, is the plight of those who found
themselves swimming about in the icy Atlantic after the ship finally
disappears beneath the surface. Cameron is smart not to simply end the
film at the sinking or very shortly afterwards, which I pretty much
expected. He shows us clearly and in a devastatingly effective manner,
the horrible, albeit short-lived fate of those unfortunates who were not
lucky enough to make it into a boat, but found themselves very much
alive and suffering in the icy waters for their last minutes of life.
After all that we have already seen and experienced, once the ship does
sink, one might feel some sort of a letdown coming, but amazingly the
film again soars in various little, quite subtle but powerful ways.
Other films on the event have often basically ended the film quite
abruptly after the sinking, and have paid basically cursory attention to
this mini-story within a larger one. Not so at all with this version.
For example, and there are just so many, when Rose and Jack "go down
with the ship," they suddenly find themselves under the murky water,
desperately trying to hold onto each other's hands, which nature itself
and the violence of the churning ocean makes impossible. For example,
Cameron throws in a short shot of these hundreds of people flailing away
at each other and the sea from high above, making them all appear as a
huge school of hopeless fish caught in some fishing trawler boat's net.
For example, as Rose releases Jack, who has frozen to death, his body
slowly sinks into the darkness of the ocean beneath, filmed in a strange
way not as if he were sinking, but as if he were "fading." For example,
as Rose, half alive and dying from the cold, lays on a piece of
driftwood, she gazes up at a crystal clear, starry sky, the Milky Way
itself quite evident, and for a moment, we get the feeling that the cold
and the horror of her impending death has suddenly become almost
trivial, next to the wonder and mysterious universe above her. For
example, as one of the surviving life boats comes back to the dying
survivors and the masses of already dead bodies, they pass by a still
barely alive Rose, who summons up some sort of last ditch strength to
whimper "Come back, come back." When this occurs, she is still holding
onto a dead Jack, but releases him (based upon her promise to him that
she would try to survive), and swims with all of her remaining
life-force to find a whistle hanging on the neck of a floating corpse,
blowing it with her last breath to summon the life boat. There are so
many examples such as these, and the truly amazing thing about the film,
is that so many such brilliant, evocative, and magical moments are just
too numerous and frequent to mention. They surprisingly and exquisitely
appear in almost each shot and scene.
The most astounding thing about the film however, is the power and
almost cosmic taste Cameron gives to what amounts to a simple,
old-fashioned (and done before), "love story." Imparting a positive,
life-affirming attitude on the whole concept of romantic love itself,
which is something sorely lacking in so many "modern" movies, the film
often takes on an almost surreal tone on passion and desire many times
throughout. None of it however, comes off in any way as "preachy" or
sugary-sweet and phony. True love and its mysterious veneration for the
mundane and ordinary, is treated with reverence, understanding, and
subtlety by Cameron in so many small ways. For example, at one point, as
the upper class Rose is "instructed" by the lower class Jack on the
finer points of "spitting," what is essentially a rather revolting piece
of behavior, is given a quirky, fun, and "living for the moment" feel to
the budding romance. In this sense, romance itself is seen and presented
as an adventure in its own right, which it most certainly can be. Few
films today seem to impart such wisdom however. "Titanic" revels in this
whole sentiment. It also seems to demand its audience do the same, in
scene after scene.
At one point, for instance, upper class Rose sneaks down to a raucous
third class party which Jack is at. Free spirited music, laughter,
drinking and games abound, and Rose reservedly (at first) watches Jack
dancing wildly with a little girl. Sensing that "little adventurous
girl" in Rose, Jack takes her hand at one point for the next song and
dance, but gently tells the small child "You're still my best girl."
This mix of innocence and the blooming of romantic, sensual love, in
just this one short scene, is what the entire movie seems full of.
Cameron's discerning touch is everywhere when it comes to the romantic
and sexual aspects however. For instance, when Jack and Rose first meet,
Jack describes his artistic, earthy adventures in Paris drawing the
portrait of a prostitute, and the repressed and uptight Rose immediately
jumps to the conclusion that Jack's experience was a sexual one. He then
describes the prostitute, who had only one leg, and imparts to her that
his interest was art, not sex. Later, while drawing a nude Rose, Cameron
skillfully conveys the romantic aspect of sexual tension with a beauty
and grace I've rarely seen in any other film. Likewise, the innocence of
the pair and the consummation of their love is demonstrated by their
behavior shortly before and after the act itself, in delicate and
playful scenes of the two who have found in each other, the adult-child
which each actually is. By showing us the birth of this love affair, and
within context of the tragedy which is about to befall it, the film
soars time and time again into this almost unworldly area, which is
rather hard to describe.  It all invokes a reverence for love and sex,
and the two seem quite inseparable in a way. As in earlier scenes where
Jack and a friend thrill to the adventure they have embarked upon by
boarding the magnificent liner, romance/sex in "Titanic" is seen as an
"adventure" in its own right, and one not too distant from the innocence
and exuberance of inexperienced youth itself.
Jack and Rose's brief love affair is also the allegory and metaphor
behind the larger story itself, both real and fictional. For in a sense,
the sinking of this "unsinkable" ship, was also the end of a kind of
innocence and an age and the beginning of a deeper realization about
life, love, and what "it's all about." From beginning to end however,
the film seems to shake an angry fist at any negative connotations of
the enduring, healing, and magical power of life and love. This despite
the tragedy and horrible loss of life (and love). A neat trick, and I
can honestly say I've never seen another film even attempt such a thing,
let alone pull it off so brilliantly and convincingly.  For all the loss
of life, for all the horror explicitly shown in so many outstanding
ways, "Titanic" is one of the most positive comments on life I've ever
seen. Like any great film, its various components and ideas stay with
you long after you've left the theater. There is so much real food for
thought and contemplation here about so many related themes and ideas,
that it is no wonder so many feel compelled to see it again and again.
In this movie's case, once is clearly not enough.
The feeling I got mostly from my "experience" of seeing this wonderful
film however, is that of a real confirmation that we, as human beings,
are somehow "more" than just these bodies, these pieces of matter and
chemicals all interacting and that there definitely is "meaning" in our
lives, or can be. It seems like something that must be taken and
accepted however, more in a spiritual kind of "faith" than reason. This
very dualistic concept is mentioned more than a few times in the film
itself, and is especially evident in the personality of Jack and the
strength and courage which he eventually brings out in Rose. I think the
subject matter, this horrible death of so many, was a perfect vehicle in
a way, upon which to tell this particular "love" story, which is almost
entirely fictional. In sum and substance, it's sort of a more generalist
love story, which I can't imagine anyone being left untouched in some
way by (unless their heart is made of stone).  At its core, "Titanic" is
a love of LIFE story, and not necessarily in the way one might think. 
Sure, when the ship is sinking, Cameron shows us that all aboard
desperately want to hang onto life. It's much more than this however. At
one point, Rose is being safely lowered in a life boat, her future
seemingly assured. But she struggles like hell to get OUT of that vessel
of safety and security, to go search for and try to help her love, Jack,
who is chained beneath by villains to die like some drowning rat.
Cameron knows, and we know by watching his film, that life is much more
(or should be) than mere "survival." At another point, near the end, the
aged Rose (played flawlessly by Gloria Stuart), calmly, casually, and
quite assuredly, tosses a diamond necklace worth millions, into the sea.
It is meaningless, physical, material. It has nothing to do with her
experiences, with her love, and with her life. Strangely enough, for all
the money and hype, the film's "heart" is squarely in the right place,
and this is the film's ultimate promise and revelation, magnificently
realized. 
I have a feeling it will be many more years before we see such cinematic
gold like this again from the studio system. However, I do hope that if
and when Hollywood (as it inevitably must) tries something like this
again, it will remember that the real power behind this particular film,
has little to do with the effects or the money. For "Titanic" is nothing
without the story, and without the real meaning and importance Cameron
lovingly devotes, in almost every scene, to using uniquely filmic
techniques to tell such a story in the way only the art of cinema still
seems capable of doing. "Titanic" is, in the highest sense of the word,
not merely great entertainment, but great art. In a strange sort of way,
the director of this utter masterpiece has essentially shot himself in
the foot. It's almost unimaginable that he, or any other director, could
"top" this. It will be quite interesting however, to see if he can. I
wish him all the best, for in a very deep sense, with "Titanic," he has
unmistakably given the audience a piece of his own heart, openly and
unselfishly inviting the viewer to dwell not only in the magic of
filmmaking, which he obviously loves with a passion seen in a scarce
number of other industry directors, but in the unsinkable human spirit
which dwells deep within us all. It is well known, or should be, what a
"gamble" this film was for him personally, and this movie could've
easily went the way of other such mega-epics like "Heaven's Gate" and
"Waterworld." But in so many ways I've hardly even touched upon,
Cameron's "gamble" has paid off in spades, not so much monetarily for
himself or those involved in the production, but in the sense that film
audiences everywhere have been given a treasured gem in this
transcendent, immediate classic, one which has already been and will
surely in the future, be placed close to people's hearts for years to
come, and deservedly so.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Though I liked this movie overall, though there are some outstanding shots,
sequences, and effects, and though I would probably recommend it to friends
and acquaintances as one of the better cinema treatments about World War II,
my expectations were too disappointed to engage in high praise of this work. 
I had many serious "problems" with SPR from the very opening shot of the
American flag.        This image, which was also used at the end as a frame,
imparted upon the movie a kind of amoral "patriotism" which politically I do
not share, and which actually contradicted itself, in my opinion, during the
entire film.  In other words, either Spielberg was making some sort of subtle
sarcastic/ironic comment with this flag shot (which would "work" for me
within the context of the film itself), or he wasn't.  I suspect the latter.
The opening scene of Ryan as an old man visiting the Normandy cemetery was
fine except for one very annoying factor, which was to excruciatingly
reappear throughout the film, the music.  It was archetypal John Williams,
lush, overly-sentimental BS pretension, which we've heard 100 times already,
and in almost every scene in which this score swelled, I felt it was
inappropriate.        I would've much rather have heard no music whatsoever
throughout the film, or at least a very different style, from another
composer.  Some of the scenes in the film in which Williams' score was most
evident (and annoying), were very powerful and emotionally tugging in
themselves, and no music at all was needed. At the very least, an utterly
subtle form, quiet and unassuming, would've worked nicely.  However, with
most Spielberg films, and most John Williams scores, "subtle" is obviously
not in their respective dictionaries.
For instance, when we are in DC with the military brass, or when Ryan's
mother is being notified of her other three son's deaths, the music is quite
overblown and ridiculous.  Sometimes, it almost smothers the actual dialogue.
 I don't really like being manipulated like this.  The scene where an army
notification car rode up to mother Ryan's home, as she fell to her knees when
a priest tried to comfort her, was very powerful stuff.  Why not just leave
it that way without this obtrusive, blaring soundtrack of trite music we've
heard over and over again?  One could've easily substituted this entire
soundtrack for the ET score, for Jurassic Park, for virtually ANY Spielberg
film really.
I mention and highlight the music because this is an example of where the
film goes wrong for me, seriously wrong. Each time the soundtrack music
swelled like it did, it completely ruined my experience of the sometimes
overwhelming visuals.  It also completely destroyed my "suspension of
disbelief" that I was actually watching just another war movie, and this is
the film's main failing for me.  SPR tries to be two things at once, a "real"
glimpse of war, and a typical Hollywood piece of entertainment.  Perhaps this
duality isn't really possible when touching upon the reality and horror of
war, but I do think other films have given it a much better shot than SPR. 
The most striking example of the film's almost soulless failure to do justice
to its apparent agenda (to show how utterly abominable real war is), brings
me to perhaps my main complaint. The film's cinema verite, shaky documentary
camera style.  NYPD Blue on amphetamines...
A little of this "style" can go a long way.  Drenching entire scenes lasting
several minutes, was totally ineffective and pretentious to me.  Like the
stereotypical Williams score swells, the jerky camera was so overdone and
manipulative, that it seemed to undercut itself finally.  Some of this
specific technique is fine, in the right place, the right time, and used
sparingly to highlight something in particular about the image which the
director is trying to point our attention to.  But in the numerous combat
sequences in SPR where it was completely appropriate and where it should have
been effective, it was so collateral, that the camera style itself
overwhelmed the content and power of the images.  Several times, I really
felt so beleaguered, that I wish I could've reached up onto the screen and
just stabilized the shot for a moment. Generally, I am suspicious of
Spielberg's motivation for doing this in the first place.  In many ways, this
is a "false" and outdated "style" to begin with, and its use should always be
frugal, if used at all.  In short time, SPR's constant camera jerkiness
becomes superfluous to the point of actually undercutting the meaning
intended for its use in the first place.
I had other problems.  From the start, I felt Tom Hanks as lead was a bad
choice.  His performance was great, don't get me wrong.  I loved his acting
throughout.  But the whole "documentary" type feel which Spielberg constantly
kept trying to hit us over the head with throughout the film, was constantly
undercut for me, by seeing a well known actor in the part.  An unknown
should've gotten this part, actually, all of the parts.  Hey, it's been done.
 Would Spielberg do it though?        Would Paramount go for it?  Hardly.  It was
all part of some complex "deal," of course.  More Hollywood marketing, what's
going to sell, what isn't.  Star appeals, profit margins, "business."  And
yet, didn't the whole concept of SPR in a way, call for something more than
just another "vehicle" by which Hanks will possibly grab another of those
oscar statues? There are 10's of 1000's of OTHER actors in Hollywood, with
just as much "talent" as Hanks, I am sure.  Why not give them one of them a
shot at this? Why spend so much money trying to convince an audience that
they are watching something "real," then thrust into our consciousness good
ol' Forrest Gump again?
The problem is, that like the music, like the shaky camera, and like the
"patriotism" expressed, the images and subject matter, which "deserved"
something much better, were undercut by Tom Hanks in the lead.        I very rarely
ever believed what Spielberg was trying so hard to get me to believe with the
great images, sets, and action sequences he stages.  Even at the end, when
Hanks is sitting there dying and shooting a gun at a Tiger tank, I saw Tom
Hanks, actor, "best actor." At one point, Ted Danson appears.  Again, an
unknown actor should've played this.  I hardly heard a word Hanks or Danson
said during their brief encounter, nor did I believe they were soldiers, nor
did I accept any longer the reality of the destroyed French town they were
walking through.  It suddenly just became a "set" again.  My suspension of
disbelief, which so many powerful scenes in the film evoke, was broken once
more.  Hey, there's the guy on Cheers, I said to myself.  It is true that
Spielberg casts some unknowns (or hardly-knowns) in other roles, but even
then, their characters are so stereotyped that the unfamiliar faces never got
in the way of feeling at all times that I was simply watching a Hollywood
movie.
Within all of this criticism, one may have noticed some positives mentioned.
Yes, there were many.  Some of the wobbly camera in the opening sequence, was
very potent, like the troops running towards the beach.  This gave the viewer
a real sense of being there, of being in a frantic state of confusion,
attempting to move forward into a frightening and imposing blur of horror and
motion. However, a bit later, when Hanks and his men are using a mirror at
the end of a rifle to try to find out where a particular German machine gun
is firing from, why shake the camera?  When the medics are trying to fix up
wounded men on the beach, why shake the camera?  If one were there watching
these things, they would simply not be seeing it from this perspective. 
Again, this whole technique was so overused to me, that it eventually
subverted its intended purpose.  Why?  Is this just typical over the top
Spielberg?  Were the horrible images in themselves not horrible enough that
we needed this constant "gimmick" thrown in our faces over and over again? 
Was such blatant manipulation of his audience really necessary?  Like the
music, the shaky camerawork, for this viewer at least, ended up simply
interfering with the effect on me I think Spielberg himself intended.  In
many ways, SPR seemed like Spielberg shooting himself in the foot, to escape
the real horror he said he wanted to convey all along.        I have to seriously
wonder why.  Was he "afraid" to show us what he was certainly capable of
about the reality of war?  Or would that not be "entertainment" any longer? 
Would it not be part of the "deal," or would it cut into potential profits? 
Of course.  But oh, what a shame and a cop out.  And so even when trying to
concentrate on "positives" in SPR, I am again drawn to criticize it.
What's so disappointing about SPR is that it just could've been done so much
better, in so many areas, that the collective result, is frustrating.  One of
the most notable exceptions when Spielberg seemed to "get it right," was one
"sound dissolve" early in the film, which really sent chills through me. 
This was when he showed it beginning to rain, the drops falling onto leaves,
trees, and ponds, the sound of which slowly changed into that of approaching
gunfire and bombs, which it all turned into soon visually.  The sound editing
was generally great in SPR, however, that distinctive "sound dissolve" was
fantastic.  One visual gem around that time in the film, also stood out for
me, which was a shot of the men walking on a hill, silhouetted against a blue
dawn sky filled with distant (and not so distant) mortar and bomb blasts. 
My, if only more of the film could've held such qualities.  It would've then
easily approached "Apocalypse Now" (my all time favorite "war" film) and
achieved true "masterpiece" status.  It is interesting to compare the two
films actually, if only in intent and success.        "Apocalypse Now" clearly
attempts with each shot, each element, to be flowing in some uniform whole,
all to portray war as utter madness.  On that level, it is clearly unequaled
in my opinion, and succeeds brilliantly in what it tries to do.  SPR on the
other hand, whose clear intent seems to be to show us how horrible war is,
cloaks that horror in typical Hollywood cliché and hokum, ending up not only
doing disservice to its very subject, but undercutting its own effectiveness.
 The two examples in SPR given above, the sound dissolve and the silhouette
image, were only hints of what greatness Spielberg could have accomplished,
but did not.  Unfortunately, moments such as these were far and few between
in SPR, whereas in "Apocalypse Now" for instance, almost every frame, every
sound, every element actually, seems carefully (and lovingly) thought out. 
It was thus sad to witness, that each time SPR began to approach "art," it
quickly became just more Hollywood "entertainment."  Given the subject
matter, and the supposed "tribute" Spielberg seemed to desperately want to
convey, the film clearly betrays its own values. I suspect that the possibly
faulty "values" of the director himself, are the sole blame for this, but his
politics being what they obviously are, I won't "go there."
Another SPR positive however, and a whole sequence which for me, seemed as if
it almost belonged in another movie (a great one?), was that of the whole
"radar installation" attack scene, which lasted about 15 minutes.  This
singular part of the film was absolute brilliance.  It started with Hanks'
men questioning whether they should attack this area, or just go around it. 
For the first time in the film, I felt as if I were actually watching real
people, and not just actors.  Before this point (and sadly, after the
sequence was over), I again felt as if I were just watching a cast playing
parts.        This was especially evident in the earlier walking/chatting part,
where we are "introduced" to the various characters (I guess that was
Spielberg's intention).  This was pure corn, out of a dozen other WWII films,
and I didn't buy it for a moment.  Wasn't there some other way for the
filmmaker to make us more familiar with the characters than something so
consummately unimaginative?
The truly outstanding radar attack sequence, when compared to much of the
rest of the movie, seemed to strangely stand out for me, so much so that I
almost wonder if someone else directed this part.  The characters were given
a REAL identity to me during this portion.  And for all the talk (hype?) of
blood and gore and entrails in SPR, to me, the only really powerful depiction
of the horror, came in this one section of the film, specifically in the
segment when one of the GI's chests was pumping gushes of bright red blood. 
Before dying, where he meekly mouthed the words "Mama, mama" in a haze of
morphine shots, Spielberg leaves all the million dollar effects and stages
and sets behind, relying on something the rest of the film seems not to want
to delve too deeply in, namely, real death.  For all the blood and carnage
SPR shows throughout, little of it ever really made an impression on this
viewer.  It was mostly just typical "Hollywood" war movie nonsense, rows of
German soldiers being mowed down by one single American, men getting shot and
falling over, dead immediately, and lots of bandaged wounded, exhibiting very
little actual pain or suffering.  When the lone GI died in the arms of his
fellow comrades, SPR clearly for me succeeded in what it seemed to want to do
from the start, powerfully and emotionally display the actual results of all
of this flying hot metal and debris, which real combat is.
Why wasn't there so much more of this however?        When the little French girl
is handed down to a GI amidst a hail of German sniper fire, I fully expected
to see the girl's head blown off, or at least something truly horrible
happen.  Earlier in the film, in the much hyped opening 20-25 minute
sequence, there is a long beach shot of the bloody aftermath of the landing,
showing waves of blood, dead men, and dead fish.  Good enough.        But weren't
some of those poor souls still alive?  Why not show their utterly horrible
pain and suffering?  When one of the men gets his arm blown off and goes to
retrieve it in a nightmarish way, I wanted Spielberg to show us this man a
bit later on, to show us the real consequences of what had happened. 
Typically however in SPR, Spielberg "chickens out" in doing such things, and
in doing so, for whatever reason, he continually disappoints.  For myself,
the only "bloody" scene in the entire movie which had any kind of real
effect, was the dying man whose seemingly stray fire wounds, resulted in an
unstoppable sea of red gore, the life force itself, draining from his body. 
In essence, there was really nothing else in the film, despite the high tech
and obvious on-screen high budget, which stayed true to the film's own
purported intention to actually show the real horror of war, as this one
solitary scene did.
There was more to the horror of these events however, than simple blood and
gore.  SPR seems a bit more successful in displaying such, although again, it
seems to undercut itself whenever possible.  One particularly great little
fragment of the movie when it did not, was again, in this specific section of
the film.  Following their friend's slow and bloody death, Hanks goes over by
himself, and he is shaking, crying, trying to hold back the emotion of what
he's just witnessed.  There is subtle music this time.        There is also a
lingering effect to the camerawork, a slow zoom.  Spielberg lets the actor
ACT here, and even though it was Tom Hanks, my suspension was complete. 
Here, like the earlier scene where we experience up close and personal
someone's bloody death, the true nature of war was brought home to me, more
powerfully than any series of high-priced Hollywood FX.
After Hanks cries, the entire Axis prisoner scene, was also good.  There was
a real tension here, and I easily felt myself not watching a movie anymore,
but feeling as if I had some sort of personal stake in what I was watching. 
In SPR, Spielberg's more delicate and subtly discriminating touches, were
clearly the best moments of the film.  All the blood and violence and special
effects of the opening and closing sections, never came close for me, to
displaying the real horror of war, than this one little middle section, which
culminated in two men on the same side, almost killing each other because a
POW was being released. In this one short sequence, to me, the film not only
gave me a sense of the real horror of war, but it also had a real moral
center and soul.  The subtle nature of Spielberg's touch here was also the
real power of the effect.  This was to be lost afterwards however, and
especially near the end of the film.  If, and I emphasize that word, any real
tribute to basic humanity and the values and ideals which made "our" side the
"good" side in WWII, was present in SPR, it was only present in this one
section, seen through the eyes of the translator, and eventually Hanks.  This
whole concept was utterly blown to bits at the end of the film however, and
throughout other sections was given only lip service at best.  Had SPR truly
explored such ideas however, I guess that would've cut into the special
effects and explosions, and we couldn't have that now, could we?
Overall, SPR's standard MOP seems to be cliché exaggeration and more.  There
are few real surprises in this film.  For all the unique things in it, there
is little very original or thought provoking, and time after time, Spielberg
just does not seem willing to take chances.  A lot of SPR actually feels more
like your standard, formula episode of television's WWII series from 60's,
"Combat." That series in fact, which used to be a favorite of mine, kept
entering my head throughout SPR.  The men walking in the field chatting and
wisecracking, the quiet whispering in the church at night, the whole French
girl/sniper/dying soldier in the middle of the road scene, and most of the
last half hour at the bridge, seemed regulation Vic Morrow material to me. 
In SPR, about the only added element to this 2 and ˝ hour episode of "Combat"
was clearly money spent on sets and effects.
So many archetypal scenes like this, I felt, were simply missed by Spielberg,
that is, their POTENTIAL to be presented in a truly original, superlative,
and powerful manner, was missed.  Even the opening landing sequence, which
has been commented on by many as so "gory," came nothing close to what I
expected (and hoped for).  One of my chief complaints about ALL war movies,
let alone WWII ones, is that none have very effectively portrayed (for me)
what combat must really be like.  SPR did so in some respects, better than
most.  But some of the images were laughable to me.  The singular shot of the
guy laying there screaming, with half of his guts hanging out on the sand,
was something out of a cheap horror movie.  It wasn't believable at all.  The
shot of the man trying to retrieve his shot-off arm, was also not effective. 
Many of the so-called "gore" shots, seemed simple FX to me, and nothing of
their real import or pain was portrayed effectively by Spielberg.  WAY TOO
MANY shots for me of Americans mowing down whole groups of German soldiers,
like as if this was a standard scene out of WWII (it wasn't).  It IS a
standard, stereotypical scene out of WWII MOVIES however.  I had hoped for
much more however, in SPR.  Guys riding up onto tanks and armored cars
throwing in hand grenades, more rows of Germans mowed down by a single man,
Generals quoting Abraham Lincoln with schmaltzy music swelling, the wiseguy
from Brooklyn, the tough sergeant, the scene where the WRONG Private Ryan was
notified of his brother's deaths were all predictable, boring, and totally
cliché to me.  All of these things were plain old stock WWII movie nonsense. 
This might've worked 20 years ago.  I expect more today.  If a man gets his
arm blown away, I want to "feel his pain" for a few moments, before moving on
to the next FX shot.  If German tanks were as formidable and frightening as
those who fought them have testified, why was taking them out so "easy?" 
Hollywood, that's why.        I saw only ONE shot near the end, where they fire a
mortar or bazooka at a Tiger, when the shell only bounced off harmlessly. 
Otherwise, in Spielberg's fantasy WWII world, whole German squads can easily
be mowed down by a single GI, and tanks and other weapons can be disabled
with nothing more than some good old GI Joe bravery.  For all the effects,
for all the blood and guts that ARE shown, SPR continually refuses to step
over certain lines.  It wants to be two things at once, which is its ultimate
undoing, to show the "reality" of war, but to do it in an entertaining
Hollywood story suited for mass consumption.  Whenever Spielberg gets close
to one side of it, the reality side, he once again becomes the Hollywood
entertainer.  It's as if he were trying to put menacing sharks or dinosaurs
in the middle of "Schindler's List." SPR felt that way generally to me
throughout. A schizophrenic movie, no doubt about it.
Three parts of the film (though there are others) were particularly annoying
in this manner.  When the decision to hold the bridge is made, and Hanks
comes up with the sock bomb/sniper in the tower/middle of the road lure/plan,
the men begin putting this into action.  So what do we get?  Not a sense of
the real desperateness of their plight or their fears, but more over the top
music, quick cuts and shots of the preparation (right out of Jaws), and more
MOVIE MOVIE stuff.  Then a much too long, extended "lull" sequence as the
troops await the German's attack, which SHOULD depict some sense of impending
doom and death, but which concentrates more on triviality.  I simply didn't
buy it.  And by the way, was Hanks so out of touch and unable to reach his
superiors at this time, that he would not/could not try to find out what THEY
wanted him to do when Ryan refused to go back?        What was it that completely
turned Hank's character and motivation at this time, from getting the mission
accomplished, to playing hero? This was bad writing to me, or just
unrealistic movie heroics.  In real life, I don't think this would've played
out at all like it did in the film.  Again, cliché, audience manipulation,
and Hollywood crapola.
Who can take the death and final heroics of Hanks vainly shooting his pistol
(Hanks, the sudden "hero"?) at the Tiger seriously, when at the very last
moment, the "Calvary" arrives and the tank is blown away by a plane?  All is
right with the world.  Happy ending.  Nonsense.  I laughed out loud when the
plane arrived to blow the tank away.  I couldn't believe how corny and
predictable this was, and still can't believe Spielberg utilized this
hackneyed concept at all, let alone in such a crucial part of the film. 
Wasn't this scene a direct copy of the one in "Jurassic Park" where the
people are just about to be eaten by the two vicious Raptors only to be
"saved" at the last moment by the T-Rex?  Cornunoriginal corn.  Hank's death
after this, was also totally unmoving to me, and was also completely
predictable at this point.  His death seemed quite contrived, and like so
many other parts of SPR, quite expected.  I fully expected Hanks to die from
about mid-point in the film, exactly as he did. I even guessed at what he
would say to Ryan in his dying breath.
However, what WAS NOT expected (for me at least), and what eventually made me
throw up my hands with the film as a whole, was when the meek translator, who
had acted so afraid and cowardly up until this time, calmly shoots the
earlier released POW who had been part of the last battle sequence.  This was
the same man which the translator had befriended, the same human being which
he pleaded with Hank's to spare over "moral" issues, and here, near the end
of the film, Spielberg has the ONLY true moral character in the film (the
American translator) calmly murder the smiling, hands-raised, unarmed
prisoner.  This was done so casually, and obviously shown intentionally that
way by Spielberg, that ANY sort of patriotic feelings I myself held at this
point, were totally wiped out.        Why did this man shoot the prisoner? 
Spielberg seems to be trying to make some point here, some "subtle" one at
best, that such horrible insanity all around has even turned the meek but
moral coward into just another part of the vicious madness, and yet, any such
"point" is totally negated by yet another "cheat."  We are never really given
any reason for this behavior, are not shown any consequences of it, and it
totally contradicts the whole concept of the film itself.  Throughout SPR, we
are constantly bombarded with this idea that all of this horror and violence
is real and appalling.        And yet, at the end, when the translator murders the
unarmed POW, I was left to wonder what was the point of ANY single
"patriotic" element in the film?  How anyone could proudly show an American
flag flowing in the wind AFTER this, and really expect any decent human being
to feel the slightest sympathy with the filmmaker's own biased
(nationalistic) viewpoint, is beyond me.  Could it be that the very immoral
and materialistic "soul" of SPR, clearly revealed to myself at least, is only
a reflection of what's lacking in the "soul" of its creator?  I have no other
interpretation at this time, and would have to say yes.  As a whole, SPR
fails for me as anything but entertainment.  To read into the film anything
"deeper" than that, feels as disingenuous to me as reading same in most of
Spielberg's other works.
Summing up, I walked out of this film hardly thinking afterwards of it,
except for dwelling on my disgust for the wasted effort and money.  Like so
much of Spielberg's other "enjoyable" work (Jurassic Park, ET, and the Raider
sequels), it is digestible filler candy for awhile, but there are no great
ideas here, no true moral or political or philosophical "center" or soul.  I
have not found myself thinking much about anything in this film subsequently,
except for the few brief positive moments mentioned above.  I think only the
easily manipulated, or those who were there back then and find some common
experiences depicted, think this is truly a "great" film.  It is not.  It is
average.  And to me, in many ways, it contradicts its whole subject in the
first place.  Maybe Hollywood WILL "get it right" someday, but SPR didn't. 
As a film about WWII, it is an above average one, but it comes nowhere near
others, such as "Bridge on the River Kwai," "The Great Escape," "Stalag 17,"
"A Midnight Clear," and is even inferior to the last "blockbuster" made about
this event, "The Longest Day."        Hell, at least THAT one was up front about
its jingoistic, sloppy sentimentality.        SPR dwells in a similar sensibility,
but denies doing it to its audience every step of the way.  In this day and
age, and considering what Spielberg had to work with, what the film clearly
does wrong, cannot in the final analysis, overcome the few things it does
right.        Entertaining?  Yes. Transcendent?  Only if one is easily prone to
hype, whether political, or cinematic.        This viewer is neither.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
