Authors
Sean Lee
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Midnight Cowboy (1969)
In the opening shot of Midnight Cowboy, we see a close-up of a blank movie
screen at a drive-in. We hear in the soundtrack human cries and the stomping
of horses' hooves. Without an image projected onto the screen, the audience
unerringly identifies the familiar sound of cowboys chasing Indians and can
spontaneously fill in the blank screen with images of old westerns in our
mind's eye. Even without having seen a cowboys and Indians movie, somehow
the cliched images of them seem to have found their way into our mental
schema. But do cowboys really exist, or are they merely Hollywood images
personified by John Wayne and Gary Cooper? Exploring this theme, director
John Schlesinger uses the idea of the cowboy as a metaphor for the American
Dream, an equally cliched yet ambiguous concept. Is the ease at which
salvation and success can be attained in America a hallmark of its
experience or an urban legend? Midnight Cowboy suggests that the American
Dream, like image of the cowboy, is merely a myth. As Joe Buck migrates from
place to place, he finds neither redemption nor reward in his attempt to
create a life for himself, only further degeneration.
During the opening credits, Joe walks past an abandoned theater whose
decrepit marquee reads `John Wayne: The Alamo.' As Joe is on the bus
listening to a radio talk show, a lady on the air describes her ideal man as
`Gary Cooper but he's dead.' A troubled expression comes across Joe's face,
as he wonders where have all the cowboys gone. Having adopted the image of a
cowboy since youth, Joe now finds himself deserted by the persona he tried
to embody. Joe's persistence in playing the act of the cowboy serves as an
analogue to his American Dream. He romanticizes about making it in the big
city, but his dreams will desert him as he is forced to compromise his
ideals for sustenance. By the end of Midnight Cowboy, Joe Buck loses
everything and gains nothing. Just as the audience can picture cowboys
chasing Indians on a blank screen, we can also conjure up scenes from Pretty
Woman as paradigms of American redemption and success. But how realistic are
these ideals? Joe had raped and been raped in Texas. The scars of his
troubled past prompt him to migrate to New York, but he does not know that
his aspirations to be a cowboy hero will fail him there just as they had in
Texas.
Alongside the dream of success is the dream of salvation. The ability to
pack up one's belongings and start anew seems to be an exclusive American
convention. Schlesinger provides us with strong hints as to Joe's abusive
and abused past with flashbacks of improper relationships with Crazy Anne
and Granny. We understand that Joe adopts the façade of a cowboy, a symbol
of virility and gallantry, as an attempt to neutralize his shame. He runs
from his past only to be sexually defiled this time by his homosexual
experiences in New York. In the scene at the diner which foreshadows Joe's
encounter with the gay student, Joe Buck spills ketchup on himself. Standing
up, we see the ketchup has made a red stain running from the crotch of his
pants down his thigh. Schlesinger visually depicts the degeneration of Joe's
virility by eliciting an image of bleeding genitals, signifying
emasculation. Beyond the symbol of castration, the scene may also connote
the bleeding of a virgin's first sexual encounter, a reference to Joe's
first homosexual liaison. The fact that the idea of a bleeding virgin is
relegated only to females furthers the imagery of Joe's emasculation. It is
ironic that Joe has trouble prospecting for female clients, but effortlessly
attracts men. Joe believes his broncobuster getup is emblematic of his
masculinity; New Yorkers see his ensemble as camp and `faggot stuff.'
There are two predominant images of New York. The first is that New York is
the rich, cosmopolitan city where hope and opportunity are symbolized by the
tall skyscrapers and the Statue of Liberty. The other New York is Travis
Bickle's New York, a seedy, corruptive hell on Earth. Joe envisions New York
as the former, but is presented with the latter. Mirroring the irony in
which Joe envisions his cowboy attire as masculine, he mistakenly buys into
the fable that New York is filled with lonely women neglected by gay men.
Joe thinks he is performing a great service for New York, but the city rapes
him of his pride and possessions. The people steal Joe's money, the landlord
confiscates his luggage, and the homosexuals rob him of his dignity. What
has become of Joe's American Dream? Schlesinger responds to this question
with the scene at the party. Joe gets invited to a shindig of sorts and at
the gathering is exposed to a dizzying array of food, drugs, and sex. At the
party, all of Joe and Ratzo's desires are made flesh; Joe flirts
successfully with women and Ratzo loads up on free salami. Contrasting Joe's
daily struggles, shots of Warhol's crew display wanton indulgence. There is
an irreverence in the partygoers' attitude; we see a shot of a woman
kowtowing to nothing in particular, orgies breaking out in the periphery,
and drugs passed around like party favors. The party makes a mockery of Joe'
s ideals. Joe believed that hard work and persistence were the elements for
success in America; scenes of the party and his rendezvous with Shirley
suggest that  it is the idle who profit from Joe's toils. The American
Dream, Schlesinger suggests, is merely a proletarian fantasy, for those who
are content no longer dream, but become indolent.
As Joe heads to Miami, all that was significant of the cowboy image has left
him. His masculinity is compromised and his morality is relinquished. For
Joe, nothing is left of the cowboy hero and commensurately, he surrenders
the identity. Tossing his boots into the garbage, he returns to the bus for
the last leg of his journey to Miami. The final shot of Midnight Cowboy
shows Joe inside the bus, more introspective, taking only a few glances
outside the window. Instead of the frequent POV shots of Joe excitedly
looking out of the bus on his way to New York,  Schlesinger sets up this
final shot from the exterior of the bus looking in through the window at
Joe. Reflections of the palm trees Ratzo so raved about run across the bus'
window with Joe hardly taking notice. The scenery of Miami no longer exacts
the same excitement from Joe as before. The world seems smaller to Joe now;
the termination of his journey coincides with the termination of his
American Dream. No longer does Joe aspire to be the enterprising gigolo; he
resolves to return to a normal job and resign to basic means.
Midnight Cowboy presents two familiar incarnations of the American Dream.
There is the frontier fantasy that if you are brave enough to repel a few
Indians, you can set up a ranch out West and raise a beautiful family. Then
there is the Jay Gatsby dream that a man of humble stock, with perseverance,
can make a fortune in the big city. Joe's attempt to realize these dreams
robs him of his innocence in Texas and morality in New York. During his
search for an intangible paradise, Joe ends up raping a girl and killing a
man. An allegory of chasing the promise of the American Dream, Joe Buck's
progressive moral atrophy is a warning against the pursuit of illusory
icons.

Title
Review for Vertigo (1958)
Directed by Alfred Hitchcock
Written by Alec Coppel and Samuel Taylor
Scottie Fergeson: James Stewart
Madeleine Elster and Judy Barton: Kim Novak
Midge Wood: Barbara Bel Geddes
We squirm nervously as we watch Scottie desperately try to re-create
Madeleine through Judy in Hitchcock's Vertigo. There is something
discomforting about the futility of trying to extract a dead lover from a
stranger. While Scottie's actions can be interpreted as being necrophilic,
our uneasiness with the sequence is a result of something less
psychoanalytical - we empathize with Scottie's pain due to the fact that we
also are no longer attracted to Judy. The reason for this is in itself
disturbing. From the moment Hitchcock reveals to us that Judy is Madeleine,
we realize that what captivated us, enchanted us, was the product of an
actress who lives in a third-class hotel. We can no longer love Madeleine
because we now know that she is poor and has even been `picked up before.'
Hitchcock creates  an important subplot in Vertigo, suggesting that love
cannot transcend barriers of social strata. Though some viewers may find
Judy to be a submissive character, easily yielding to Scottie's attempts to
change her appearance, there is also strength inside her to remain true to
her modest life. She does not run away from her drab furnishings and move in
with Scottie, though she can. She does not reprise the role of Madeleine,
with all the breathless charm and elegance, though she can. Instead, she
wants Scottie to love her for who she is, and it becomes a futile and fatal
effort. Because she is a good actor, Judy has ability to dictate the
situation she is in and possibly even craft a happy ending if she was to
completely subjugate herself to Scottie's desires. But she doesn't and with
every return we make into her spartan apartment we a reminded of her poverty
and the further we drift from our dream and image of Madeleine. Through Judy
's acting, or the lack of acting in the latter half of the movie, Hitchcock
prompts us to look at how we see people and how we judge them by their
superficies.
Aside from Scottie's project to mold Judy into Madeleine, Hitchcock also
presents us with how Scottie treats Judy differently merely on the basis
that she is not Madeleine. We are presented with two, parallel scenes  one
at Ernie's and one at Scottie's apartment in which we can see that Judy is
treated differently. When Scottie first sees Madeleine at Ernie's, she is
dressed in a beautiful green dress that stands out from the colorless attire
of other patrons. Scottie is captivated by her presence. While certainly
part of this is to accentuate Madeleine's beauty and make her stand out from
the crowd, it is interesting that when the two return to the restaurant
later in the movie with Judy as herself, Judy once again is the only person
who wears color. This time, however, Scotties attention turns to the
Madeleine look alike dressed in gray. Hitchcock in both scenes have
Judy/Madeleine as the only patrons that are dressed in color, which is
symbolic of the fact that they are one and alike. By having Scottie's gaze
turn towards the more affluent `Madeleine' even though the real Madeleine is
sitting across from him at the table is our first clue that it may not only
be hair color that is differentiating the two; that is, their different
positions in the social strata supersedes Judy's inherent character.
In the other parallel scene, we see Scottie prompting Judy to sit down in
front of his fireplace after convincing Judy to color her hair. This scene
is a reflection of when Madeleine sits down in front of Scottie's fireplace
to dry off after falling into the bay. The overt difference is that Scottie
is far less interested in conversation with Judy than with Madeleine. What
is disturbing is the fact that Scottie refuses to treat Judy with the same
respect as Madeleine until she can be like her. Madeleine is invited in
front of the fireplace, as Scottie offers her two cushions. However, as
Judy, she is only offered one cushion, and seemingly as an afterthought at
that. We are provoked by this discrepancy in Scottie's manner to question
why Judy is only one cushion worthy. Because there is a seemingly
intentional duplication of the scenes - both showing an insert shot of the
cushions on the ground, the discrepancy in the cushion count is unlikely a
simple anomaly. Rather, once again, Hitchcock subtly indicates the
incongruity that the same character is treated, with the only difference
between Madeleine and Judy being one of class.
 It is important to examine not only how Judy acts but how she doesn't act.
When Judy is Madeleine, she is thoroughly convincing as the rich man's wife.
Not only does she act mysteriously, her technique  the manner in which she
talks, walks, and gestures all authentically epitomize Madeleine's
affluence. As Judy, however, she does not undertake this subterfuge.
Examining Madeleine's speech at Scottie's apartment we see that she speaks
in a breathless, seductive voice. Every phrase is met with a rise in her
eyebrows and a pull of her chin. Even when not speaking, Madeleine's lips
are always parted, as if perpetually awaiting a kiss. As a contrast, Judy's
voice is far less indiscrete, or as Jay Gatsby would say, a voice `full of
money.' Her lips are drawn, and Judy is much less sexual than Madeleine. Why
Hitchcock makes this contrast between Judy as Madeleine and Judy as herself
is important as to how we see Judy's acting. It can be assumed that Judy
never met the real Madeleine; though Gavin Elster may have provided Judy
some cursory instructions on how to act as Madeleine, it should be accepted
that Judy creates the character of Madeleine from her own schemata of how
someone rich and beautiful such as Madeleine should act. Therefore, it is
important to realize that while Judy is fully capable in transcending her
humble stock to take on the role of Madeleine, she does not repossess the
grace nor elegance of Madeleine as Judy. Because Hitchcock spends a great
deal shooting at Judy's apartment rather than Scottie's, this combined with
Judy's insistence to be her true self to Scottie becomes an important test
for both Scottie and the audience. Do we treat people differently because of
their social class? Judy's Madeleine is not a portrayal of the real
Madeleine  it is the product of Judy's acting. Thus difference between the
two is entirely superficial, yet Scottie can only be in love with the
character Judy creates and not who she is. Judy's insistence to not act as
Madeleine in the latter half of the movie becomes not only a testament to
Judy's intrinsic strength, but Scottie's moral weakness.
Near the end of Vertigo, there is a scene where Judy is physically
metamorphosed into Madeleine. Once again, it is made clear that though Judy
may physically appear as Madeleine, the quivering of Judy's lips as she
visibly strains for Scottie's approval gives her away as Judy. Coming out of
the bathroom and before Judy walks towards Scottie, Judy stands for a moment
in front of the green neon sign in front of her window. The shot of her in
front of the green neon, part of Judy's hotel, is so powerful that it
immerses Judy in its green light, giving Judy a very ethereal quality. Under
the theme of affluence and class, one should examine the use of the color
green in the movie. Hitchcock has said that green is the color of ghosts,
and in such a sense our first shots of Madeleine and Judy both in green
clothes may suugest the Judy  Madeleine duplicity. Along this line, one can
easily see the richness of the scene in which Judy, doused in a green neon
flame not only literally appears like a ghost, but also alludes to the fact
that Madeleine, who Judy is now dressed like, is also a ghost. Though this
is the intent of the scene on one level, the color green also possesses a
second meaning. Green is also a color of wealth and prosperity. The green
Jaguar that Madeleine drives is an explicit example; British green has long
been a color associated exclusively with luxury automobiles. Even today, we
find green a prevalent choice in expensive automobiles while not on
subcompacts. Though perhaps a bit trite, green is the color of money, and
subsequently, the color of our desires. In Vertigo, however, green can also
serve as reminder of the absence of fortune. Unlike Gatsby's yearning for
the green light at Daisy's dock, Judy's green light is one that reads
`Empire Hotel.' This neon, which silhouettes Judy in one scene and engulfs
her in another serves as a garish reminder that this is no longer the Judy
that drives a Jaguar; this is the Judy that lives in a third-class hotel. By
having Judy separated from Scottie by the vulgar green neon, we see that it
is the wealth absent in Judy that ultimately alienates Scottie from her; the
constant reminder of Judy's poverty is powerful enough to overcome her
appearance as Madeleine.
If Judy's struggle for identity is characterized by her unwillingness to
reprise her role of Madeleine, then it is very possible in the scene that
follows the orgasmic physical metamorphosis Judy plays out a final,
desperate act. One should recall that Judy had originally intended to
divulge Elster's plan; however, Judy tears the confessional not to protect
Gavin, but as an attempt to make Scottie fall in love with herself, not
Madeleine. But things go awry and Judy sees that Scottie is obsessed with
Madeleine. For someone who so close came to a disclosure earlier, wouldn't
as an act of desperation, would Judy feel inclined to confess herself as
Madeleine? I believe she does in the scene when she puts on Carlotta's
necklace. Though it may seem her decision to put on the necklace that night
was a grand slip on Judy's part, I would suggest it is her final performance
as an actress  a desperate move to tell Scottie that she was Madeleine.
Though she acts as though putting on the necklace is a casual affair, this
is the first time we see Judy wearing a black dress. The necklace, then,
even without Hitchcock's insert shot, would become the centerpiece of her
ensemble. Furthermore, Judy prompts Scottie to clasp Carlotta's necklace for
her, drawing more attention to the jewelry. As Scottie works the clasp from
behind Judy, she faces towards the mirror, almost inviting attention to the
necklace. Finally, when Scottie asks, `How do you work this thing?' Judy
responds, `Can't you see?' Judy's line, though on the surface directed at
the logistics of the clasp, is at the same time Judy's confession of her
crime and a revelation of her identity. `Can't you see that I'm wearing
Carlotta's necklace?' `Can't you see that I am Madeleine?' It would be too
irresponsible if Judy pulled out her most expensive piece of jewelry without
remembering its significance. Rather, in her last heartfelt acting job, she
shows Scottie what he wants to see in hopes that he can finally love her for
being Judy. Sadly, her hopes for a silent reconciliation are met with
Scottie's contempt, for he is now faced to confront the fact that Judy will
never play the role of Madeleine again.
humble girl is given the role of a lifetime in Vertigo. Like a starlet who
peaks too soon, Judy becomes haunted by her single, solitary role. In her
decision not to recapitulate her role as Madeleine, she becomes unable to
transcend her tawdry life to become the affluent ghost Scottie is in love
with. Hitchcock poses an important question for the audience of  Vertigo 
Why can't we fall in love with the same woman? It would seem the fact that
Judy is Madeleine would draw us closer to her, yet ironically, our knowledge
of her humble stock seems to extinguish our desire for her altogether. For
what is the inherent difference between Madeleine and Judy? Though both
characters are played by the same woman, the division between Madeleine and
Judy is one of social status. In Vertigo, as we frustratingly watch Judy
refuse to become Madeleine, Hitchcock prompts us to confront our own
fixations with superficiality and status.

Title
Review for High Noon (1952)
High Noon is a Western. Yet while comfortably residing in this cinematic
niche, it transcends the typical spaghetti Western by creating a story far
more intricate than cowboys and Indians. The Western as a film medium is by
its very nature a remnant of America's dirty little imperialist past. As a
result, the idea of the Western seems to connote ideas of prejudice and
perhaps even genocide. High Noon, however, does not pander to the audience's
expectations of a Western; instead, we find a revisionist film with a female
Mexican shopkeeper, few shootouts, and a hero whose intentions are unclear.
Perhaps the most obvious stereotype-breaking element in High Noon is found
in the character of Helen Ramirez. Helen is the strongest person in the
town. This fact may be overlooked by her decision to leave the town. But in
her relationships with people it is clear that she is the more powerful.
There are also more subtle ways in which she shows her strength  for one,
she is the only character in town who accepts and understands Will Kane's
decision to stay. It is also important to note that while the character of
Helen Ramirez is certainly uncommon in the films of High Noon's era and
genre, her role is effortlessly convincing, unlike some politically correct
presidents appearing in movies lately.
One should not overlook other ways in which High Noon defies
conventionality, either. The character of Will Kane seems to break just as
many rules as the character of Helen Ramirez. Kane never chases his enemies
in the film; enemies chase him. Even in the movie's lone gunfight, Kane is
always in retreat throughout the scene (though this may also be attributed
to the fact that he is outnumbered). This retreat, the unwillingness to
confront the other members of the gang before Frank Miller's arrival, is
both a result and reflection of the town's own withdrawal.
There's a poignant scene near the end of the film when Will Kane essentially
awaits his execution. The camera starts with a close-up of Kane and then
cranes dramatically away form him, heightening the sense of Kane's
desolation/abandonment. What is particularly stunning, however, is the
exaggerated movements of Will Kane; his eyes are wide open and dart back and
forth, he blinks involuntarily, he makes a feint to his guns, and wipes the
sweat from his brow and with a deliberate movement, flicks his fear into the
ground. Kane in this scene shows a great amount of fear, and we find our
hero is full of doubt. High Noon does not let us take the hero for granted;
instead, it questions whether the hero did the right thing by staying.

Title
Review for Eve's Bayou (1997)
The summer she killed her father, Eve was 10 years old  or at least, that's
what Eve believes as she laconically states in the opening and closing of
Eve's Bayou. The audience, however, gets the feeling that the truth is far
more complex. To dissect Kasi Lemmons' gorgeous directorial debut through
the validation of its presumed truths would be irreverent to the rich
tapestry woven by Lemmons. However, as the film is oft-times enigmatic in
its lyric, a thoughtful examination of the role of truth in Eve's Bayou may
lend a hand at elucidating Lemmons' intentions. Eve's Bayou is about the
selection of images' and the awareness that reality may elude the images we
select as truths.
In the opening shot of Eve's Bayou, the film starts in black and white and
turns to color as Eve's voice-over ends and the film's story begins. The
black and white sequence corresponds to Eve's telling of the Baptistes' and
her own past. As Eve's narrative ends and the film turns to color, the
audience is left with the question of who is now telling the story. Are we
seeing Eve's recollection of her own selection of images' or are we
watching the events being objectively told by Lemmons? In a film where there
are different sides to every story, the question of reliable narration plays
a role in how we come to understand it. As expected, the answer to who is
telling the story in Eve's Bayou is also ambiguous. There are some scenes,
though few, where Eve is not present, which would indicate that Eve may not
be telling the story, or at least in the capacity of sole narrator. On the
other hand, Eve possesses to some degree Mozelle's clairvoyance and the
possibility that Eve's mother telling her what Eve didn't know is also quite
possible.
Our best indication, then, may lie in the opening scene. There are two items
in particular that I find interesting in the sequence. One is the image of
Eve  not the one played by Jurnee Smollett, but the very first Eve Baptiste
as told in the opening narrative. She is standing at the edge of the bayou
looking into her reflection in the water, right before the camera pans into
color. The other item of interest is the transition into color itself, and
the fact that it is achieved not by a fade or dissolve or traditional cut,
but through what seems to be a matte with black and white on one side of a
tree trunk and color on the other. This invisible cut reinforces the
continuity of location while at the same time clearly indicating a temporal
change. Complemented by the image of the first Eve Baptiste gazing into the
water as it changes to color offers explanation to who is telling the story
of Eve's Bayou. It is neither completely a pastiche of recollections of
Louis Baptiste's daughter, nor is the story told entirely through the
objective eye of the director. The story of Eve's Bayou is told through the
Bayou itself and this is implied by the double-entendre of the bayou's name.
Which Eve is the Eve of Eve's Bayou? Both women gaze into the bayou and in
its reflection find a piece of the Baptiste story.
Reflections play an important role in Eve's Bayou. Not only does the movie
begin with a reflection of Eve, but the movie ends with the reflection of
the descendants of Eve reflected in the Bayou. Though the use of mirrors as
a symbol of duality has been discussed in film analyses to the point of
becoming a cinematic cliché, I feel I must discuss Kasi Lemmons' extensive
use of mirrors in Eve's Bayou because reflections play an important role in
a movie whose verisimilitude lies below the surface. Take, for instance, the
scene where Eve tells Cisely that she saw their father with Mrs. Mereaux.
While Eve is describing her father's indiscretion, we see Cisely both facing
Eve and reflected in the mirror as she desperately tries to make sense of
what she is hearing. Through the use of the mirror, Lemmons presents the
dichotomy between the Cisely who wants to believe that her father is
faithful and the Cisely that believes Eve. We find that Cisely is unable to
decide how to view her father  perhaps she sees him as a womanizer, as she
tells Eve later that she believed her all along; or, she may believe that
her mother doesn't really love her father, and forgivingly views him as
feeling unloved. This indeed is the confusion that will foreshadow the
tragic miscommunication that occurs near the end of the film.
So what really happens the night Cisely goes down to comfort his father? Was
it Cisely who kisses his father not as a daughter but as a woman, or was it
Louis, who kisses his daughter not as a father but as a lover? Just as our
preceding examination of the story's narration yielded not some absolute
answer, but a variegate one, we can be assured that Lemmons will not be so
conspicuous as to offer an easy explanation to the night's events. On the
other hand, Eve's Bayou is not cinema verite, and there is no presumption
that the truth needs to be presented explicitly. Nonetheless, I feel Lemmons
suggests, again through the use of mirrors, that perhaps Louis'
interpretation of events as written in his letter to Mozelle is correct. In
the scene, when Cisely sits on her father's lap and leans over to kiss him,
we see part of her body reflected in the mirror while Louis is not. Had the
mirror reflected them both, we might have said that both were willing
partners in the act and the mirror reflected the duality between
father/daughter and secret lovers. Lemmons, however, deliberately cuts off
the reflection in this scene so that only Cisely is reflected to show that
it is Cisely, who in an attempt to substitute for her mother's absent love,
expresses love in a way that crosses acceptable boundaries.
Returning to the ideas posed in the introduction, is there anything in Eve's
Bayou that can be construed as absolute and with the efficiency and
confidence of Eve's opening narrative? There is, and it is none other than
Eve's words that open and close the film. `The summer I killed my father I
was ten years old.' Lemmons makes this lucid in the scene where Eve meets
Mr. Mereaux in the market. At first, Eve asks Mr. Mereaux about Mrs.
Mereaux, but goes no further. She asks where the apples are and there is a
shot of her walking up to the apple cart, stopping in front of the cart and
pondering the apples, and then turning around to intimate to Mr. Mereaux her
father's affair with Mrs. Mereaux. Through the reference to the biblical
Eve, Lemmons conspicuously makes the argument that it is indeed Eve who
kills her father. The apples, which are metonymic with temptation, drive Eve
to sin against her father. Yet even in this observation, Lemmons is able to
create some ambiguity, for even though she talks to Mr. Mereaux right after
looking at the apples, she also summons the powers of Elzora in the same
scene. Was it Elzora or Mr. Mereaux who kills Louis Baptiste? If Eve was the
catalyst for her father's death, could not Elzora carry out Eve's wishes
through Mr. Mereaux? This is a thoughtful question posed by Lemmons and our
interpretation likely depends on whether we are romantically or
pragmatically inclined.
Eve's Bayou is not a film with simply stated truths; even when we seem to
find an answer, Lemmons turns the answer to a question. Eve seems to be
narrating the movie, or is she? Louis takes advantage of his daughter's
adoration, or does he? Through Lemmons' inspired use of her camera, we may
glean a few explanations for ourselves so that we may feel some comfort in
our ability to comprehend. Certainly I have tried to do so in writing this
essay. At the same time, however, I would allude to Peter Weir's Picnic at
Hanging Rock as a reminder that some ideas are ultimately ineffable and the
search for definitive truth is made both in vain and vanity. Eve's Bayou
transcends the need for simple answers as Lemmons carefully leaves its
meaning open to interpretation. Life is not of black and white, and the
story of Eve's Bayou lies within the immutable grays that romance our
subjective interpretations of truth.

Title
Review for Fury (1936)
Waiting at the train station near the beginning of Fury, Joe says: `After
all, we're human.' In the context of events to transpire, Joe's line is
prophetic, foreshadowing the internal conflict of the protagonist in the
latter half of the film. Does being human necessarily imply humane behavior?
Through the baseness of human character exemplified in the formation of a
mob, Fritz Lang prompts the viewer to consider whether our inclination
towards impulsiveness supersedes our civility.  Expressing his abhorrence
towards the rise of Nazism in his homeland, Lang takes great care in
creating a sense of discomfort during the scenes of mob hysteria.
 In the scene prefacing the lynching, the mob achieves critical mass at the
bar. Deputy Meyers is brought in as an exalted informant, but when he is
unable to augment the mob's myth of Joe, he is quickly renounced from his
position as town gossip. We see in a shot where two bar patrons are arguing
that the deputy looks around nervously at the growing monster and then
carefully slips out of the bar. What is quietly horrifying is the
realization by both the audience and the deputy that the crowd no longer
exists within the confines of reason and has succumbed to what the barber
referred to as impulse. What once was excitement to the deputy has turned
into fear with the realization that he is now powerless. To the audience,
the deputy's quiet exit concurs with their own sinking feeling of uneasiness
as the mob's delirium crescendos. Lang educes this discomfort not through
movement of the camera, but rather its stillness. The shot's composition
places the audience equidistant and directly across from the pair of arguing
patrons and the Deputy effectively becomes a mirror to our own
apprehensions. As the intensity of the mob closes around Deputy Meyers, it
does so around the viewer as well. The stationary camera in this shot
heightens our fears because when the Deputy escapes, we are deserted by our
reflection and the viewer becomes the sole proprietor of sensibility amongst
a swarm of irrationality. Because the camera does not track the Deputy's
movement, we are left with an amplified perception of desertion and
vulnerability.
As the bar scene progresses, the camera pans 180 degrees to reveal the fury
of the mob. This shot is unique because it is a point-of-view shot where the
audience, not a character in the film is the subject. While a long, or dolly
shot may objectively reveal the size of the mob, panning from the mob's
belly distorts the audience's spatial reference and exaggerates the
claustrophobia of the scene; we feel we are at the epicenter of something
infinitely large. We see close shots of people's faces, contorted by their
rage. With the pivot of the pan being in the center of the mob and angry
members within a short radius of the pan, Lang offers the viewer a sense of
what it feels like to be the subject of a lynching. In this shot the
audience is at the mercy of the mob; Lang's camera makes us feel vulnerable
and powerless as Joe must have felt in the jail. In some greater sense, it
must have been what Lang felt when he saw his countrymen overcome with
unjustifiable hatred towards their own humankind.  Lang's observations of
his fellow man succumbing to mob behavior left him with an indelible image
of malevolent human behavior.
As Joe faces his peril, trapped in his burning cell, his dog Rainbow rushes
to be by his side. Lang makes Rainbow a martyr to contrast his humanity
against the recklessness of his human counterparts. Using his camera to
create shots that elicit disturbing images of mob mentality, Lang depicts
man's volatility and `impulse' towards inconceivable cruelty. Reprising Joe'
s line at the train station, we are induced to question why our primeval
impulses so easily transcend our humanity.

Title
Review for Walkabout (1971)
When Walkabout was released nearly thirty years ago, it was widely regarded
as a cinematic pičce de rčsistance. Roeg's lush photography combined with a
deceptively elemental story yielded a film of both intoxicating beauty and
relevance. Unabashedly advertised in the film's theatrical trailer as `the
most different movie you'll ever see,' Walkabout lives up to the appellation
by being Kubrickesque in its vivid imagery and openness to interpretation.
Roeg's film is primarily about existence at the margin and the nature of
communication. What surrounds the walls that we erect and can we exist
beyond them? Walkabout suggests that cultural coexistence may be a myth; our
lives are intrinsically inclined towards an indigenous domicile and its
native tongue binds us.
The theme of home emanates from Walkabout's lyric. The comforts that lie at
one's hearth are oftentimes immeasurable. One of my fondest memories of
growing up were days at camp, but there were always the first few days that
were spent terrified of my new habitat and much time was spent longing for
home. Eventually, one gets makes friends and adapts to the new environment,
and when the two or three weeks are over, we would give anything for another
week. Oftentimes Walkabout is interpreted as a `back to nature ' movie, but
the opposite is true. The children cannot accept the outback as a place
where people call home. There are times when the Girl and her brother seem
to adapt to their surroundings, but the acceptance of the Australian Outback
is tenuous at best. The Girl meticulously keeps her school outfit clean and
makes sure she looks presentable even in the desolate desert. She even wears
her bra throughout the journey, as if clinging to the icons of her
civilization would serve as a token of her existence. Once the Girl finds
the abandoned farm, the sight of her irrepressible relief reminds us that
she still longs for familiarity . For the Girl, there is never harmony
between her home and the outback; her travels with the Aborigine were
necessary means to an end. Though the film concludes with a sense of regret,
the Girl chooses to recollect her experiences as an image of happiness, but
not as an inspiration to break the cyclical monotony of her life.
Why is the acceptance of the outback so difficult for the Girl? Nicolas Roeg
sets up the answer to the question by presenting the idea of boundaries. Man
strives for convenience and packs everything that could be desired into
dense, over-populated cities. When the cities run out of space, skyscrapers
are erected to increase capacity. The conflict between nature and civilized
man is established in shots early in the film. While the family members are
coming home, we see shots of buildings amongst trees . The mise-en-scčne of
these shots suggest a relationship between the organic and inorganic, and we
sense that their coexistence is unnatural.  Roeg comments: `All architecture
has [an artificiality]. No matter how much it is spoken about it goes with
the trees' It's artificial - whatever way you look at it. ' Another example
of this is also one of the more startling images in the film. The Father,
coming home after work, stands on the deck of their apartment and looks at
his children playing in the pool.  The POV shot is amusingly perverse; we
see the children playing in a pool by the ocean . Revenge by Mother Nature,
it seems, is exacted later in the film when the children reach an Edenic
oasis only to see the water dry up shortly after their arrival. The scene,
in a didactic way, seems to scold the children for their wasteful ways.
Juxtaposing organic elements with inorganic elements elucidate modern man's
vain efforts to exist in both a natural and synthetic world. Civilized man,
represented by the Father and the Girl, seem driven by solely by economies
of scale. And the cities become traps  walking home through a botanical
garden is no substitute for a forest just as swimming in a pool is no
substitute for the sea. At some point the Father realizes this. Trapped from
real experience, real transcendence, the Father takes his life and attempts
to spare his children of civilization's prison as well.
The opening sequence to Walkabout shows shots of brick walls which pan to
either the hubbub of Sydney or the bareness of the outback . Through these
shots, Roeg presents the viewer with the concept of boundaries. The wall
becomes a metaphor for the division between the resident and the
aboriginal  the civilized White and the primitive Black. The walls of the
modern man effectively keep the unwanted out, but to what extent are these
boundaries actually the self-imposed trappings of the civilized? Modern man
raves of technological progress, but the Father, the Girl, the Boy, and even
their automobile cannot survive in the an environment where the natives
thrive.
Walkabout explores what happens when the products of industrial civilization
are displaced to the margins of their familiar world. It is important to
note that the Girl is not dropped in the heart of the aboriginal land, but
in a border zone where two cultures meet.  Roeg makes this clear not only
through the shots of the brick wall which infer a line of demarcation
between two cultures, but also the frequent emissions of the radio, which
offers the impression that the children have not strayed far from the city.
On the flip side, though the land the children are in are certainly more
foreign to them than the Aborigine, he too, cast away from his home to
undertake the walkabout, is placed at the margins of his own society. This
subtlety should be recognized in that it relieves from the Aborigine the
burden of being a host; that is, he is on a journey of survival just as the
Girl and her brother are and he is under no obligation to play the role as a
guide for the children. In fact, in the end it is the Aborigine that does
not survive the walkabout. Their meeting takes place at a border zone where
the cultures of the city and the outback connect. By removing the schemata
of their familiar lives, Roeg presents cross-cultural communication in the
most fundamental context. Thus, what happens to the characters, which aptly
remain nameless throughout the film, becomes an allegorical tale of cultural
coexistence.
When the children first meet the Aborigine, the Girl unsuccessfully tries to
communicate with the Aborigine. `Water!' she cries repeatedly, `You must
understand. Anyone can understand that I can't make it any simpler!' The
Aborigine looks in confusion. Finally, the Girl's' younger brother makes the
gesture to drink, and the Aborigine immediately understands, and shows them
how to draw water from the ground through a reed . Herein lies the
pessimistic undertone of the film. Roger Ebert wrote: `[Walkabout] suggests
that we all develop specific skills and talents in response to our
environment, but cannot easily function across a broader range. It is not
that the Girl cannot appreciate nature or that the [Aborigine] cannot
function outside of his training. It is that all of us are the captives of
environment and programming ' Continuing further along the lines of Ebert's
hypothesis, I would suggest that the fact that the Girl, who is fourteen,
cannot effectively communicate in comparison to her younger brother further
provides a subtle point. As all children look at the world with wonder and
curiosity, the little boy in Walkabout is a reminder of the plasticity of a
child's mind. Roeg feels that the boy's age of six is crucial because it is
the point where `one begins to form proper memories. Then at eight you start
worrying about school, then at nine, ten, eleven, [you worry about] exams .'
The boy's age, according to Roeg, is at a point where one still feels secure
and trusting, but the little boy is just at the cusp of loosing that
security . For the 14 year-old Girl, even necessity for water cannot impel
creativity. She has taken for granted the power of language, and is too
jaded to feel the need to communicate in any way other than English. Her 6
year-old brother, on the other hand, is able to communicate effectively not
because he is more intelligent, but because he has had less of the
environmental programming suggested by Ebert. Like some studies which show a
critical period in which a child can effectively learn language, in this
scene, Roeg presents the idea of a critical period of communication.
Sometime between the ages of the Girl and her brother, Roeg suggests our
programming is complete - even the common tongue of gesticulation then
eludes us, and our communicative abilities become hard-wired instead of
remaining dynamic.
In Shakespeare's The Tempest, Caliban, the beast-human slave of Prospero
cries: `You taught me language, and my profit on't Is, I know how to
curse. ' The power of communication is an important theme in literature.
Prospero taught Caliban language so that he could know when to chop wood or
pick berries, not so that he could engage in philosophical debate. Because
of the inherent power in bestowing language onto another, frequently lessons
in language become a source of domination over the pupil. Certainly, Friday
was quite enamored with Crusoe for enlightening him on the White Man's ways.
Subtly, this theme is explored in Walkabout. While the little boy is willing
to talk to the Aborigine in the Aboriginal tongue, the Girl, even near the
end of the film, still insists, `Water! Water!' However, her cries are no
longer the cries for help, but akin to orders for a slave . She commands the
Aborigine to fill a bucket from the fountain at the abandoned house while
she is just as capable of filling the bucket herself. The Aborigine takes
the bucket and softly replies, `Water.' The disappointment in the Aborigine'
s face is evident as he finds his sexual advances are met with the Girl's
callous indifference. Just like Prospero and Caliban, the language shared
between the Girl and the Aborigine are words of governance, not compassion.
Under the rubric of communication, we find that Roeg again suggests that
after a certain critical period, we no longer become receptive to subtleties
of communication. The POV shots of the Girl looking at the Aborigine's
buttocks and groin early on were the first indication of a sexual interest
between the two.  There is also an erotically suggestive shot of the tree
limbs and later a POV shot of the Aborigine juxtaposing the Girl's leg next
to a tree limb in his mind's eye . Yet tragically, because neither party can
articulate their attraction for one another, the relationship turns into one
that is more effortless for both of them but detrimental to their
coexistence; the Aborigine becomes the waterboy while the Girl retreats to
dreams of the city.
If there is an instance when Roeg lets us ponder the image of coexistence,
it is in the beautifully evocative swimming scene . We see the Girl and the
Aborigine existing, if just for a moment, in a temporary Eden. The
cross-cutting  between shots of the Girl swimming and the Aborigine hunting
carry a domestic proposition  the Girl is at home with nature while the
Aborigine, under the role of her husband, works to provide for the family.
The little boy follows the Aborigine to learn the ways of hunting. For this
moment, the Girl, the Aborigine, and the boy represent Everyman; stripped of
all pretext, they exist simply as God's children, and cultural barriers
cease to be. Jenny Agutter, who plays the Girl, recalls: `[Nicolas Roeg]
wanted it to be the most innocent and beautiful sequence of the film, which
[depicts] just their living. Because if they don't have that at this point,
then there is no regret at the end .'
It is regret at the end of Walkabout that is our indication that this is not
a Back to Nature' story. Had it been such, the Girl would have stayed in
the outback, or would have at least altered her lifestyle when she returned
to the city. Roeg, however, shows us that the Girl gets married and lives in
the exact same apartment she did as a child. There are a couple jump cuts to
the brick wall, signaling her existence back within the boundaries of her
society. The situation is perverse because not only does she return from her
walkabout uninspired, she clings to the tokens of familiarity with increased
fervor. Living in the same block flat looking over the same pool - she even
marries a man who works in the same building as her father. The lessons
learned in the outback are lost and she has come full circle. It is
understood that one day the Girl, now a woman, will look over the deck at
her own kids playing in the pool by the ocean and realize like her father
before her, the sterility of their existence. Unlike her father, however,
she will be burdened by the memory of her moment of transcendence and how
she failed to grasp it.
Walkabout is not an indictment of industrialization or technology. The
barriers to communication were built with bricks from both sides of the
wall. The civilized trap themselves in a synthesized existence and the
primitive stodgily adhere to ways of the old. While the Girl could not find
solace outside her programmed environment, the Aborigine was equally
ineffective in coexisting with the Girl. The message in Walkabout, however,
is not entirely pessimistic. Though the final scene may be colored with
regret, we also notice the little boy, who must now be a young man, missing
from the scene. Perhaps there is a period in one's life where one can still
be enlightened. Roeg leaves the possibility that somewhere out there the boy
exists, and carrying the lessons learned on the happy highways of his youth,
he continues to wonder, communicate, and coexist with all people. We hold
within ourselves the similar hope that we shall never lose such ability to
be inspired.
