Authors
Mr Q. Z. Diablo
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Cube (1997)
A review submitted to rec.arts.movies.reviews of CUBE (1997)
Mr Diablo has been long awaiting the opening of CUBE in his home town. 
He had heard about it through an acquaintance and was struck by the
originality of its premise.  Having stumbled across the title in the
local paper, he saddled up and made his way to the local art-house
cinema in order to partake of an evening's entertainment.  Despite the
fact that aspects of the film have been lambasted by several critics, Mr
Diablo was enthusiastic about the venture so he picked his way through
the gloom of the sparsely populated theatre in order to place himself in
an optimal viewing position.
CUBE is a science fiction film with horror overtones regarding a group
of people who have been placed, for reasons that they do not understand,
in a gigantic structure consisting of a large number (over 17000, as the
cast repeatedly reminded Mr Diablo) of interlocking cubes.  Each cube
contains six doors leading to adjacent cubes, some of which are equipped
with deadly booby traps (the nature of one of which is illustrated in
the startlingly executed opening scene).  None of the protagonists
remember how they came to be inside the titular edifice and nor are they
aware of what purpose is served by their plight.  Given these facts, it
seems imminent that they find a way out, which they attempt to do.
The first thing that struck Mr Diablo about CUBE was how good the film
looked, considering the low budget.  He is saddened to note that
$1000000 is considered a minuscule budget in these overblown times but,
nonetheless, CUBE looks far more lavish than he would have possibly
expected for such a sum.  CUBE is director Vincenzo Natali's first
feature and Mr Diablo suggests that Mr Natali will be a talent to watch
over the next few years.  The set (and there is only really one of them)
is far and away the star of the show and, in itself, lends an air of
claustrophobic desperation to the proceedings.  Mr Diablo regards this
as a very good thing as he has gripes regarding several other aspects of
the film that would have sunk it were it not for its stylistic strengths.
Mr Diablo's first niggle concerns the dialogue.  The small audience was
observed to giggle disturbingly frequently as idiotic lines were
followed by even more idiotic speeches.  Maurice Dean Wint playing
Quentin, a policeman, is heard to claim that his job is to "see through
people - like X-rays" on a number of occasions.  It almost seems that
scriptwriters Natali, Andre Bijelic and Graeme Manson have imposed
dialogue on characters who have had no previous existence outside the
time span covered by the film.  One does not develop a character by
having an actor mouth said character's every waking thought - audiences
come to understand portrayals through observing a number of things about
an actor's performance; mannerisms, reactions to situations and so
forth.  It is simply not necessary to spell things out to even the
dimmest cinema goers.
The dialogue is so bad, in fact, that it had moments of making Mr Diablo
feel almost sorry for any cast expected to recite it.  Almost any cast,
anyway.  In most cases, the performances are almost amateurish. 
Attempts at terse exchanges between the macho Quentin and the neurotic
Holloway (a doctor, played by Nicky Guadagni) are laughably overwrought.
 While there is no stereotyping according to race, occupation or
anything similarly obvious, the characters represent certain personality
types and most of the cast seem incapable of instilling any kind of
nuance into their performances in order to expand their personas.  Mr
Wint and Ms Guadagni seem also to equate the depth of feeling that 
their characters have regarding certain ideas with a compulsion to
deliver their lines at extremely high volume.  After only a short while,
Mr Diablo found himself reflexively cringing every time these two
worthies even looked like they were going to engage in any kind of
discourse, no matter how brief.  On a more positive note, the
performance of Andrew Miller as the intellectually disabled Kazan is
very convincing, although Mr Diablo's lack of knowledge regarding autism
and related conditions prevents him from making a truly informed
judgement.  Nicole de Boer playes a nervous school student as blandly as
can be imagined and David Hewlett turns in an overwhelmingly uninspiring
performance as a former office worker with a dark secret.  Wayne
Robson's turn as the escape artist, Holloway, is fairly difficult to
evaluate owing to his early and gruesome demise.
Mr Diablo's last major problem with CUBE was the research put into key
aspects of the script.  A large component of the resolution of the film
is to do with prime numbers (don't ask Mr Diablo to explain this - he
feels that it is a major spoiler).  Leaven, the edgy but mathematically
gifted student, when asked whether a number (say, 765) is prime umms and
aahs almost interminably before announcing that the number is not prime.
 She then proceeds to factor it as 51 x 15.  This is all very well but
any student of mathematics, however indifferent (and Mr Diablo is a fair
measure more indifferent than most), knows that a number ending in 5 is
never prime because it may be divided by five.  Mr Diablo found very
quickly that he had to bite his tongue quite whenever any of the
"mathematical" sequences occurred in order to avoid annoying the
black-clad, trendy clientele of the cinema by yelling out the answers.
Despite its obvious flaws, CUBE is not a bad film.  Mr Diablo
particularly liked the baroque look of the sets (as alluded to before),
which brought to mind aspects of Clive Barker's overrated HELLRAISER and
its (superior) sequels.  Some of the CGI work is astounding, producing
spikes, razor-sharp wires and endless-seeming shafts descending into the
bowels of the earth completely convincingly.  The make-up effects, which
are extremely well executed, complement the sets and CGI perfectly in
contributing to the impression of hopeless panic at which Mr Natali
appears to be aiming.
Mr Diablo was also impressed with the camerawork which is, by and large,
both interesting and restrained.  Most shots of the action are taken
with the camera at an angle of 15 degrees or so above the performers,
giving the impression that they are somehow being observed by some
unknown entity.  The use of dissolves to denote the passage of time is
not nearly as irritating as Mr Diablo usually finds it but he would
prefer that film makers realised that it just looks plain hokey.
CUBE recalls, in concept, Satre's _No_Exit_ and could have been executed
more competently than it was.  Mr Diablo was grateful, however, to be
given a science fiction morsel that attempted to provoke thought in its
audience - a perfect panacea for the hype of EPISODE I - THE PHANTOM
MENACE, which he has not yet been brave enough to see, owing to the
legions of dweebs from all walks of life who still populate cinema
foyers, replete with plastic light sabres and clad from head to toe in
hessian potato sacks.  CUBE misfires in several important departments
but when it comes down to sheer, raw style it manages to attain a pretty
convincing thumbs up.  Let's hope that Mr Vincenzi can find some decent
writers and go on to produce bigger and better things in the next few
years - genre cinema is desperately in need of talents such as his.  In
the interim, Mr Diablo will hold off from viewing the first of the STAR
WARS prequels and consider the purchase of a VCR to ease the horror
drought that seems to be afflicting the filmgoing public at present.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
EXPLANATORY NOTE:  Mr Q. Z. Diablo would like to apologise in advance to
The Phantom for the tone of this review.  The Phantom reviewed horror
films from about 1989 until about 1993 in this forum
(rec.arts.movies.reviews).  Mr Diablo has derived more pleasure from The
Phantom's film reviews than those of any other reviewer, either in
cyberspace or on paper, amateur or professional.  He hopes that The
Phantom will regard this review as a homage rather than a cynical
attempt to ape the style of another for some kind of perverse personal gain.
It was an inclement Sunday night when Mr Diablo dragged a reluctant
bandmate to view THE MATRIX.  The local multiplex is not necessarily Mr
Diablo's preferred haunt but the sheer power of hype was to be reckoned
with.  Unlike The Phantom, Mr Diablo actually prefers art-house cinemas
with their coffee and black-clad patrons discussing possibly mediocre
films in an oh-so-serious manner (readers should refer to the
explanatory note and search in IMDB or DejaNews if this reference
escapes them).  The plan was initially to go to the 6pm screening but
distractions of a musical kind caused attendance to be delayed until the
9pm show.  The assumption that the late screening time on a Sunday would
dissuade Joe and Josephine average from venturing out to the cinema was
horribly mistaken.  They were out in their droves and Mr Diablo was to
be found muttering obscenities sotto voce while staring in dismay at the
lengthy queue, which stretched almost from the ticket office almost to
the amusement arcade opposite.  It seemed that Sunday night's treat was
to be abandoned.  Somehow he obtained a ticket and his response to the
cinematic entertainment purchased for the princely sum of $10 is the
subject of the next few paragraphs.
THE MATRIX is a not so much a genre film as a genres film and yet
somehow avoids being generic.  It simply bristles with ideas, albeit
mostly other people's (just like this review, the author hopes). 
Loosely speaking, the genre can be classified as science fiction which
runs a distant second to Mr Diablo's preferred horror films, of which
there has recently been a sad lack in either mainstream or art-house
release, the abysmal URBAN LEGEND and I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST
SUMMER notwithstanding.  As SF goes, THE MATRIX is a rather seductive
excursion into cyberpunk which possesses all the usual accoutrements of
the stable.  There are hackers, evil government agents, gunplay, urban
sprawl, dim lighting and a healthy dose of virtual reality.  In short;
everything a growing boy or girl needs for a satisfying night's
entertainment - in theory.  It also boasts a more than healthy dose of
eye wear, and Mr Diablo will attempt to refrain from obsessing about it
in the course of this review; an attempt that is probably doomed to failure.
Mr Diablo will attempt to outline as much of the plot as possible
without revealing details which will blunt the film's appeal.  It
concerns a young man (the irritatingly wooden Keanu Reeves, replete with
pudding-bowl haircut and Eastwood-esque squint) who works for a large
software company by day and operates as a hacker with the prophetic nom
de plume Neo in his spare time.  It seems that Neo has been a less than
well-behaved cyber-citizen as the merciless hounds of the law have taken
a particular interest in him.  Fortunately, an unknown organisation has
taken an interest in Neo's welfare and, while these unknown people seem
to be able to bend reality in uncomfortable ways, the alternatives to
throwing his lot in with them seem rather dire.  They are fighting a
construction called The Matrix which seems to be somehow woven in with
reality in some kind of sinister fashion.  When the nature of The Matrix
is revealed, all hell breaks loose as Neo and his new-found companions
battle the evil forces which have set it in place.
The last part of the plot synopsis is, as far as Mr Diablo can make out,
the chief flaw in the film.  Director/writers Larry and Andy Wachowski
(whose previous film, BOUND, escaped Mr Diablo's notice) have penned a
script whose exposition is absolutely enthralling but the lack of any
real plot means that the film begins broadcasting its structural defects
as soon as the protagonists' circumstances have been explained.  This
left Mr Diablo with action and computer generated effects in abundance
which appeared to be imposed upon the films central ideas rather then to
grow out of them.  As a result, he was left feeling a little ambivalent
about the action set pieces which populated the last forty minutes of
the outing.  He was also left wondering why anyone would squint as
constantly as Mr Reeves in such dimly lit locations, let alone why so
many people were insistent upon wearing sunglasses indoors in
semi-darkness.  He assumes that sporting sunglasses in tenebrous locales
represents some kind of cyber-chic that has heretofore eluded him. 
Perhaps someone had been listening to too much 80s music when the
costume design was being finalised.
Characterisations are somewhat less complete than one would hope for in
a cyberpunk outing, with most characters trying desperately to expand
from one to two dimensions.  Mr Diablo regards this as something of a
pity, as cyberpunk in written form has tended to produce extremely
complex characters and interpersonal interactions.  The good guys are
essentially the stereotypes presented to us in the STAR WARS trilogy. 
We have Luke (Reeves), Leia (the rather visually appealing Carrie-Anne
Moss as Trinity), a Han Solo and an Obi-Wan (Morpheus, guru-ed in fine
style by Laurence Fishburne).  The remaining good guys are, of course,
cannon-fodder apart from the addition of a traitor, whose demise occurs
altogether too early for Mr Diablo's taste, despite an irritating
performance straight out of the worst of the crop of action films that
arose, unbidden, throughout the 80s.  His scenery munching and
eye-rolling seems so much out of place that he broadcasts himself as the
rat almost as soon as he is introduced.
The action sequences are well-realised and exciting.  Mr Diablo has read
some reviews which have referenced Hong Kong action cinema as a
jumping-off point (so to speak) and he was pleased to observe a large
amount of Wing Chun Kung Fu amongst the variegated bare-hands fighting
styles on display.  Action sequences, therefore, tend towards the
choreographed which adds to the style-over-content feel that seems to
dominate the film.  Special effects are variable with computer generated
imagery veering between the well-integrated and the cheesily tacked-on. 
Some of the make-up effects have a high ick-factor and the various
mechanical contrivances seem to have been designed solely to take
advantage of our aversion to all things arachnid, insectiod and
cephalopod.  The soundtrack is often delightful, featuring very
contemporary electronic music that undercuts the action very effectively
indeed.  Readers should think Propellerheads (whose "Bang On" is used in
one of the better action sequences) and they've got the, erm, picture.
As concerns the borrowing of ideas that has been referred to, Mr Diablo
observed pieces of THE TERMINATOR, GHOST IN THE SHELL, HACKERS and the
awful THE LAWNMOWER MAN, grated and melted together to produce a
fondue-ish plot and themes.  Throw in the STAR WARS trilogy for
characterisation and mythic feel and add, when the mixture begins to
bubble, a dash of Terry Gilliam's wonderful TWELVE MONKEYS for that
little bit of post-apocalyptic flavour.  Other borrowings are present
but Mr Diablo would prefer not to try to remember all of them, both for
the sake of space (brevity not being his best attribute, in any case)
and because the hour grows late as he types this magnum opus.  In any
case, there are enough of them to keep train-spotting viewers
entertained almost as much as the film itself.
The basic premise of the film is almost reasonable but some considerable
suspension of disbelief is required to let the many inconsistencies in
plot devices go unheeded.  The very nature of The Matrix is such that Mr
Diablo fails to understand how the good guys cannot immediately be wiped
out at the whim of the evil forces at work.  He can't explain this in
any detail without revealing too much about the film's resolution but he
hopes that even the dimmest in the audience worked it out after the
first forty five minutes.  The only thing that Mr Diablo couldn't work
out was why the hell Mr Reeves didn't don a pair of sunglasses
substantially earlier to ameliorate his need to squint.  There was a
strong feeling that he'd blend in better with the rest of the cast as
well as avoiding strain on his vestigial acting muscles induced by
attempting to express emotions by adopting various facial casts.
Readers of this review should not labour under the misapprehension that
Mr Diablo thought that THE MATRIX was a bad film.  Far from it; despite
the unabashed borrowing of other films and styles, THE MATRIX has an
awful lot going for it.  The camera work consists of that mix of the
static and the mobile that Mr Diablo finds appealing  He regards any
film that gives him unpleasant flashbacks to INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE
as overdone in this department and was pleased that no such unpleasant,
dizzy, pop-music-video sensation was engendered during THE MATRIX.  The
vilification of a certain software giant (intentional or otherwise - Mr
Diablo hopes that the former is true as this would add a certain mordant
symbolism to the goings-on) is welcome, as is the epic father-figure
theme that underpins the sometimes empty action.
Mr Diablo enjoyed himself almost thoroughly for a couple of hours and
this is all that can really be asked, even though there was the constant
nagging question of WHY DOESN'T MR REEVES PUT ON SOME #$%&ING
SUNGLASSES.  He will refrain from awarding marks out of ten, a letter
grade or an arbitrary number of stars in deference to The Phantom, whose
work inspired him to pen this prose.  THE MATRIX is far from flawless
but will serve as a stop-gap until THE CUBE or a piece of respectable
horror cinema comes to town, whichever occurs first.

Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
Mr Diablo found himself at rather a loose end on Sunday afternoon and
decided, by default, to go to the pictures.  After examining the
newspaper he found that the only vaguely acceptable choice was Joel
Shumacher's 8MM.  The local art-house cinema was showing a number of
films of little interest so he shrugged his shoulders and ambled down to
the multiplex in order to view hollywood product.
Mr Shumacher is responsible for a number of films which Mr Diablo has
placed in his "pet hate" category.  He has not seen, and does not intend
to see BATMAN AND ROBIN but is still jarred by the unaccountable
popularity of the asinine THE LOST BOYS.  He intended not to dwell on
the distant past as he walked into the darkened cinema but to assess the
film on its merits and will attempt to keep his personal biases under
control as he writes this review.
8MM is an exploitation film.  The genre has given audiences such "gems"
as BASIC INSTINCT and thus, being forewarned by virtue of having read a
number of reviews beforehand, Mr Diablo was looking forward to scenes of
gratuitous prurience, no small amount of violence and, perhaps, a poorly
executed nightclub scene.  8MM was, sadly, nightclubless but boasted an
impressive array of scenes set in underground pornography dealerships;
perhaps by way of consolation.
The plot is quite simple.  An unexpectedly stiff-upper-lip private
investigator, Tom Welles (Nicholas Cage in an unnecessarily overwrought
performance) is called in to determine the authenticity of a supposed
snuff film found in the personal safe of a defunct tycoon.  He is
convinced that it is real and is asked to determine the source of the
material.  Mr Diablo is an absolute sucker for urban folklore and such a
premise was potentially enthralling, especially when the matter was
examined by Andrew Kevin Walker, the scriptwriter of the excellent
SE7EN.  He was disappointed to find that the best laid plans of mice and
men had gone sadly awry.
This problem initially became apparent within the first half hour of the
film in a series of vignettes of Mr Cage's initial investigations of the
seamy side of hollywood.  Multiple dissolves and the use of not-quite
voice over diminish the immediacy of the goings-on to the extent that Mr
Diablo was feeling decidedly restless by the film's halfway point.
Given that 8MM is largely exposition, with the violent payoffs occurring
towards the end of the film, Mr Diablo could have expected better.  He
is a fan of films which develop slowly and, in the best of all possible
worlds, logically.  8MM develops slowly, yes; logically, reasonably.  Mr
Walker's script, however, never rises above the level of thick-eared
private eye hokum, requiring the cast to labour over occasionally
ludicrous dialogue as well as frequently (and unnecessarily) segueing
into a sub-plot concerning Welles' marriage and private life.  This
sub-plot is couched in terms of a theme relating to Welles' loss of
innocence but themes seem decidedly out of place in a film which,
despite its dark visuals, remains determinedly lightweight.  8MM is a
mystery that fails to be mysterious and a thriller that fails to thrill.
The visuals almost have something to recommend them but, thanks to
Shumacher's unerringly heavy-handed touch, they manage to give the film
a merely sleazy feel where a sense of mystery was required.  Evidently,
this is the director's attempt at style over content (of which there is,
regrettably, little) and Mr Diablo is an avowed fan of the
aforementioned (he is unwavering in his dedication to the films of Dario
Argento, for example) but Shumacher is no stylist.  Attempts to contrast
scenes rich in colour with the washed-out look which pervades the
sequences that are relevant to the plot are extremely misplaced devices
in a films that is attempting to ride on the strength of its script. 
Stabs made at attention to detail simply end up as so much visual
clutter and the final sequence set in a cramped and dimly-lit house
features a ludicrously mobile camera.
Mr Diablo was not convinced that he would witness acting of any
particular standard but was pleasantly surprised by the performance of
Joaquin Phoenix as Max California, a porn merchant who aids Welles in
his quest for the truth.  Peter Stormare turns in an enjoyably
scenery-munching exhibition as the maker of the snuff film but the
remaining members of the cast manage to be boring at best and ludicrous
at worst.
8MM is a mess.  Worse still, it's an only intermittently entertaining
mess.  Mr Diablo has only ever walked out on one film but 8MM came close
on a number of occasions.  Mind you, this may have been a combination of
the innate tedium of the film and the innate stupidity and excessive
volume of Sunday afternoon multiplex-goers.  He still awaits with keen
anticipation the next horror outing that makes it to the big screen in
the backwater that he calls home.  In the meantime, 8MM returned little
for the $10 investment save an unusual premise and some unpleasant violence.
