Authors
Matthew Ignoffo
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mr. Peabody and the Mermaid (1948)
These are the two classic mermaid movies. The British film MIRANDA made
Glynis Johns a star and was so successful that it caused the American
film studio Universal-International to create its own mermaid in the
form of 20 year old Ann Blyth who had gained recognition as Joan
Crawford's daughter in MILDRED PIERCE.
At the time neither film was considered a great work of cinema. But over
the years, the two have gained in stature. MIRANDA can now be looked at
as an allegory of man seeking to escape from the Victorian rigors of
proper London society -- and society in general. The Doctor in the film
has a chance to live with an aluring, naked mermaid in her sea-cave. His
only chance of returning to formal society is if he will bring Miranda
back with him. She is depicted as a worldly-wise, seductive fish-woman
who bats her almond-shaped eyes at men and knows exactly what effect she
is having on them. As a result, she becomes the embodiment of everything
sensual and seductive -- she is the enchantment of the feminine sea
itself calling man back to his more primitive instincts.
Lenore, the young mermaid in MR. PEABODY AND THE MERMAID, is naked too
when Mr. Peabody catches her. Yet she is much more innocent than
Miranda. Lenore is falling in love for the first time, whereas Miranda,
even though she tells the Doctor he is her first man, may be carving
notches in a seashell someplace. Lenore, thus, represents a completely
different quality of the sea and of woman -- the innocence and the pure
beauty that draw us to the water. Though the film was viewed as a vapid
farce when it first came out, it now can be viewed as a story about man
dealing with age and loss of youthful vigor. Mr. Peabody has just turned
50 which he describes as the youth of age and the age of youth. Catching
Lenore may be seen as an allegory of his attempt to reassert his manhood
in the face of oncoming age.
In both films, the men must give up their lovely mermaid lovers, but
each man learns something about himself and life from the encounter with
these mysterious creatures of the sea. The Doctor learns that he is not
quite as adventurous as he thought he wanted to be, and Mr. Peabody
learns that he can grow old gracefully and still keep his manly charm.
Though MR. PEABODY AND THE MERMAID is readily available on tape, MIRANDA
and its 1954 sequel MAD ABOUT MEN are hardly to be found anywhere. They
are not on tape and are seen only rarely on television. This is indeed a
pity because the two "mermaid movies" as Ms Johns refers to her two
mermaid films are charming and really did establish her as a star.

Title
Review for Love! Valour! Compassion! (1997)
The film is well intended, but like many films of plays, it doesn't have
the impact. It is well done and has a good cast in a nice setting. The
first problem is that the character who is supposed to hold the whole
plot together (the owner of the house in the country) is such a vacant,
bland person (and is played that way by the actor) that the story is
just a lose set of scenes. Jason Alexander does a good job with the part
played by Nathan Lane on stage. Bobby, the blind lover, has a wonderful
sweetness that is really appealing. Hot latino Ramone is very impressive
as the "other man." John Glover really steals the film as two brothers
named Jeckyll -- undoubtedly an allusion to Jekyll & Hyde since the two
brothers are opposites. One is nasty and bitter. The other is very
likable and is dying of AIDS. We see most of the cast fully nude
although Mr. Alexander graciously shows us his tush but nothing else.
The mood, especially the mood music, comes off as a bit syrupy. But the
strongest appeal of the film is that it is about human relationships.
Ultimately it is not about gay men, but people.
