Authors
Ritalynne Brechner
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for September (1987)
     We are told this disappointing film takes place in Vermont (Mia Farrow
returns to Peyton Place?) but we never really know that, as not one shot is
filmed out of doors.  Action (?) takes place within the claustrophobic
environs of a country house, with six characters pairing off into conversations
that others intrude upon regularly.  Even the choreography of this film is
boring.
     The conversations that do occur when the characters "relate" have to do
with tales of unrequited love, passion fulfilled, pseudo-step-patricide,
friendship betrayed, and other matters of depth.  With drinks in hand--I don't
remember a movie with so much liquid refreshment.  Never a light moment.  Or a
refreshing one.  Or a humorous one.  Or ...
     And all of this angst is relayed to us in what may be cartoon voices.  Mia
Farrow whines.  Dianne Wiest sulks.  Elaine Stritch has gravel on her tonsils.
Eli Wallach whispers.  Even Sam Waterston, normally a fine actor, kvetches.
     I believe that sometimes we learn through other people's art.  Sitting
through this movie was an excruciating experience.  I am hoping that in the
future I will be able to use some of the pain to better my life.  Else, there
would have been no point at all to the $7 ticket price.

Title
Review for Good Morning, Vietnam (1987)
     This new film is a fabulous stream-of-consiousness riff by Robin Williams
surrounded by a remarkably dull war story.  It is supposed to be based on a
real-life 60s army radio MC, but it does no good to know that.  Perhaps the war
story is something on which he insisted.  I saw the movie a week ago, and now I
believe the purpose of the silly story is to give the audience time to relax
their mouths and cheeks, and catch some breath, as breathing is hard when
you're laughing as much as you do while Mr.  Williams is working.
     A couple of years ago Mr.  Williams rented the Metropolitan Opera House
(which seats 3,718 people) and performed an intimate monologue there.  During
that show he occasionally became less funny.  But breathing was an obstacle.
Both for him (he speaks so fast I have doubts as to how he inhales at all) and
for the audience (we were rolling in the aisles.)  I believe it was filmed for
TV.  That might be the best way to see him, with the less funny material edited
out, and a remote control so one can stop it every once in a while and respire.
     But this film has enough of Mr.  Williams being funny to make it worth the
$7 (I think I paid $30 for the Met) and enough fluff to leave time to breath.

Title
Review for Dancers (1987)
     Let me start my saying that I love ballet, adore the ABT company and like
GISELLE enough that I was a Super in the ABT's Met performance of it last
spring.  But I have never been enchanted by ballet on the screen, either movies
or TV.  I was, however, impressed by TURNING POINT, Baryshnikov's debut film,
as it used the ballet to illustrate the lives of the Dancers.  Even WHITE
NIGHTS used ballet well, employing a very cinematic piece by Twyla Tharp to set
the mood for the movie.  DANCERS uses the actors to illustrate GISELLE.  It
doesn't work.
     The point of the film seems to be to bring the story of Giselle's
seduction and death up-to-date by showing a modern seduction by Baryshnikov's
character, who dances Albrecht in the ballet, of a member of the chorus
(village) in juxtaposition to her "correct" romance with a member of her own
class (a stagehand).  There is even an insane scene of both the Giselle-like
chorus member and Alessandrs Ferri dancing GISELLE on the stage, very amateurly
cut together.
     There is a lot of GISELLE in the film.  Most of the better parts of the
first act, because it is meant to correspond to the "current" situation, and
much of Act II (the Willis in the forest trying to dance the men to death)
because that's where the viruoso dancing is.
     If you enjoy ballet on film, like GISELLE, worship Baryshnikov, and don't
mind the dance interrupted for close-ups of his face, then you will probably
not resent paying $6 for this film.
     One thing is absolutely certain.  Even the most die-hard fan will hate
this film when it hits the small screen.  Only its size saves it now.
