Authors
Bryan Youngsur Lim
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for LÃ©on (1994)
     Just saw THE PROFESSIONAL.  This should've been a really good
movie, as we all know Besson is a certifiable genius.  The movie has a
nice beginning, but that's about all I can say in defense of it.
     There's some really poorly handled Lolita-isms with the little
girl.  Not that I have a problem with the little girl-older man thing,
if it's handled well like in THE LOVER (and I'm not just talking about
the gratuitous nudity), but in this movie you never really understand
what's going on, and you get the impression that Mr.  Besson is really
into seeing young girls in slutty clothes.
     The action sequences are *incredible*.  As perhaps the biggest Woo
fan I know, these sequences come damn close.  Unfortunately, they're
too short, and you only get this tiny window into what could have
been.  It's just not gratifying, as they're entirely too infrequent.
     Milk.  Milk is this strange recurring motif in the movie, a pretty
lame motif, too.  Perhaps it's supposed to inspire this sense of growth
or some crap like that, but I didn't dig it.  Also, there's a plant
which is really over- emphasized.
     And, last but not least, the film is set in Brooklyn.  I don't
care if he's French, Besson should have the good sense not to set a
film here because, with some obvious exceptions, Brooklyn is just too
cliche and a tad too tacky.  I always think of that crappy Seagal flick
and how he's buddies with the pizza kitchen owner who
Knows-How-Things-Work.
     I'm open to discussion on this topic, because I really *wanted* this
movie to be great and to me, it wasn't.  A real waste of two great
actors (Jean Reno and Gary Oldman), too.
