Authors
Kevin Romano
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Hope and Glory (1987)
     Having been tremendously impressed by John Boorman's work on THE EMERALD
FOREST, I went to see HOPE AND GLORY over the weekend, and, true to the reviews
I had read previously, it is a very realistic and convincing evocation of the
World War II era in England as seen through the eyes John Boorman -- the 
child.
     There is humor, pathos, tenderness and lots of other endearing virtues to
this movie.  What there is not is drama.
     Even if we don't agree with our imperfect institutions, such as the law,
government, the political economy, there are historical reasons why they
developed the way they did.
     Likewise, in film, the structure of the screenplay has developed through
years of experimentation, trial and error, relationships shared with other
forms of drama, as well as many other reasons.  To challenge such collective
wisdom requires the true force of historic genius pushed to an inevitable clash
with what has gone before it, and through such a clash is born the advancement
of the human race.
     However, for me, HOPE AND GLORY is not such an event, even though John
Boorman has chosen to challenge them in this film.
     The essence of drama is the clash of the human will against obstacles --
the testing of just what it means to be a man or a woman.  In this process our
human condition is illuminated.
     Now it is rather obvious that we share certain things with the animals;
physical bodies, a certain level of emotional life etc.; it is equally certain 
that there are things which we don't share -- things which make us uniquely
human.  Lest I digress too much, by way of example let me say that I greatly 
enjoy movies about nature, but for me, for the most part, nature films are
unable to create true drama just because they lack this testing, this probing
and searching out of the good, the bad and the ugly of the human will.  
     So too reminiscences -- no matter how wonderful, how evocative, how
well-crafted are not drama if they lack this crucial testing and this, I feel,
is a major weakness of HOPE AND GLORY.  To be sure, it has lots of other
virtues, virtues which others have amply pointed out.  I offer this merely as
something to think about if you haven't already seen the film, or are going to
see it again.  Both my wife and eleven-year-old daughter liked the film more
than I did, so I thought I'd try to put down in words just what it is that
bothers me about it.  
     As film history progresses we will perhaps see the advent of new forms of
filmic story-telling.  It's an exciting thought.  HOPE AND GLORY, however,
takes us, in some ways, a step backwards.  

Title
Review for Milagro Beanfield War, The (1988)
     While watching the opening credits roll on this film I said to myself,
"Wow, this is really hokey!", but the clearly superior cinematography and the
music, while inappropriately European or Argentinian sounding, kept my hopes
up, and I was rewarded with a charming cartoon -- not the animated variety, but
the kind William Goldman talks about in his book ADVENTURES IN THE SCREEN TRADE
(Warner Books Inc., New York, NY 1983).  In it there is a short chapter called
"The Ecology of Hollywood" (p. 151).  Therein he talks about comic-book movies.
THE MILAGRO BEANFIELD WAR is a comic-book movie par excellance.
     Being as the movie is recently released I won't divulge much about the
story, but I would like to urge that, if you like fairy tales and/or cartoons,
you simply can't miss this movie.
     At the outset let me assure you that I am a bonafide hispanophile.  I'm
married to a woman from Colombia who is the greatest thing God ever did for me;
I speak Spanish (which was a definite aid in enjoying this movie), love the
food, some of the music, the cultures.  So how can you expect an unbiased
review?  Well, I know something about movies, having written screenplays.  Let
me start there.
     The movie, like so many others, is based on a novel.  No, I haven't read
the novel, but there is no need to.  A screenplay has to stand on its own two
feet, even if it's an adaptation from another medium, perhaps more so when it
is.  The differences between a good novel and a good screenplay are too
numerous and far-ranging to go into here.  I bring this up, however, because so
many adaptations fall flat because of it, but also because the movie's title
mislead me.  I thought I was in for some good drama, but found I was fed
pablum.  This bothered me.
     To be sure some great movies have been made with Hispanic characters and
cultural values.  Brando was involved in some great ones: THE APPALOOSA (actor,
1966) and the colossal ONE-EYED JACKS (actor/director, 1961) after which
Brando, for having spent so much money directing it, was unable to work as a
director.  Another less well known and surrealistic film is THE MOLE shot in
Mexico.  I suspect only the real cine addicts amongst us may have see it.  I
also refer you to THE NEST/EL NIDO (Spanish, 1980) as another great one.  This
is not meant as a pitch for Spanish films, but merely to provide a comparison
between the difference figuratively and cinematically between sinking your
teeth into a steak and being fed pablum.
     One of the refreshing things about this movie is that there are no big
"stars" in it.  There are actresses and actors that you've seen before, but no
one you'd recognize as "big."  Sonia Braga (Brazilian) has a part in it.  Maybe
you'll recognize her.
     I've never been quite able to understand just exactly why "unknowns" are
not used more.  Some of the great Italians used them extensively.  See eg.,
DeSica's UMBERTO D (1952) or the touching American film DAVID AND LISA (1963)
whose biggest "star" at the time was Howard Da Silva who, while admittedly a
great actor, did not have tremendous name recognition.  There's money to be
made with unknowns, but who in Hollywood these days will risk it?  I'll go with
Stallone -- where are the keys to my Porsche, thank you.
     While not meaning to lessen any of the good to great supporting actors in
this movie (and there is a great performance turned in by the Mexican character
actor Carlos Riquelme who plays a character called Amarante), the part/heart
stealer for me was the pig cast as Amarante's pet.  You've simply got to see
him/her.
     You'll laugh with this movie and the characters will make you love them.
When it's done you may feel like you've been to a carnival -- my wife and I
made tacos and drank beer after watching it, but it may also make you feel like
you've just eaten cotton candy.  You'll feel good while you're eating it, but,
afterwards, you won't feel like you've had anything substancial.  Don't let
that put you off.  This is good entertainment, and, although a formula tale of
rich land developers vs. indigent, but spiritually rich, folk, it is lots of
fun.  The issues this film raises need to be raised again and again.  The
simplistic political message at the end of the film certainly has widespread
belief, if only the real world worked that way.  It kind of proves you can't
answer serious problems with simple-minded ideas from the elite.  Look for
small chinks in the cult of machismo in this movie too.  Directed by Robert
Redford.

Title
Review for Fabulous Baker Boys, The (1989)
     This film has a lot going for it and a lot not going for it.  It has a
great beginning and ending, pieced together with a yawn-filled middle section.
It was written and directed by the same man, whose name I don't remember.
Anyway, let me explain myself.
     Traditional screenplay format allows for a beginning, a middle and an
ending.  The middle section is the longest because it has to carry the weight
of the dramatic development of the theme, which has been proposed in the
beginning and will be resolved in the ending.  The main trouble with the
writing of the screenplay for THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS is that there is almost
no development in the middle section.  It's almost as if the film could have
gone from beginning to ending for all the development that takes place in the
middle.  It's not that there isn't any, but that it is so meager and rather
unconvincing.  At one point I was wishing the film would hurry up and get over.
Don't take this to mean you should avoid this film, because that would be a
mistake.  The film has lots of other things going for it.
     Although Hollywood nepotism has brought us lots of people we'd just as
soon forget about.  I don't count Lloyd Bridges' sons, Jeff and Beau, amongst
them.  Jeff Bridges has become a terrific actor.  Unfortunately, in this film
the director does a miserable job of bringing out his character's weaknesses -
weaknesses on which the plot rests.  Beau Bridges, on the other hand, does a
fabulous job in his part.  In fact, when he is missing from the middle section
of the film it begins to drag.  He is completely convincing and I recommend
anyone who takes an interest in acting to watch him in this film.  His
performance and the direction of his character are first class.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, too, does a top-notch job of acting - and, rather
surprisingly, she can also sing.  It's wonderful to watch actors like Jeff
Bridges and Michelle Pfeiffer develop their acting skills over time.  It makes
you want to go see what new thing they will bring to the screen next time.
Only a few other actors have this refreshing approach.  I refer to people like
Meryl Streep, Marlon Brando, Dustin Hoffman.  Michelle, as we know, is a
physically beautiful person.  Of course, sexual attraction is subjective.
Michelle does not come across in this film as the type of person you would want
to have an off-hand fling with, even though she plays the part of an
ex-call-girl.  For me in this film she is definitely the bring home to mother
type.  Perhaps I should personally analyse why I feel that way.  It's puzzling
to me why I would want to bring Michelle's character home to mother while
Michelle's performance is so, shall we say, 'worldly'.  At any rate this brings
up one very important reason why we the audience go to movies in the first
place.  That is, of course, to learn about ourselves.  
     There's a lot of very nice minor touches in this film; some decent music,
a very nice crane shot near the beginning, a convincing bit actress in a
bedroom scene, also in the beginning, some fuuny comedy, as well as a wonderful
"showdown" scene between the Baker boys.  There are also some nasty plot holes
to watch out for.
     I feel I have to add one more objection and that is, overall, the plot,
its development, and resolution turn out to cost the characters next to
nothing.  The film has a happy, upbeat ending.  I like that.  What I don't like
is when the decisions the characters make in a film don't cost them anything.
As we know there are no free lunches in life.  We, as Americans, don't expect
any.  Decisions we make often cause the course of our entire lives to change.
There is pain involved - a failing business, an unhappy choice of profession, a
divorce, forced separation from loved ones - on and on.  THE FABULOUS BAKER
BOYS is a little too neat, too pat, too removed from the consequences of our
choices for my taste.  
     So what I suggest is that you go see this movie, even though it is uneven.
It has things to not recommend it, but lots that do.  It's one of those films
that you can learn from.  I would especially have liked to have strangled the
director's ideas for the (un)development of Jeff Bridges' character.  See if
you agree; you'll have some very nice moments along the way.

Title
Review for Mitt liv som hund (1985)
     This film has several good metaphors to sustain its thesis that our
children don't let us down, but that we adults let them down.  The story is
told from the point of view of Ingemar, a young boy whose mother is ill.  She
never really wants to have much to do with him anyway.  He lives in a squalid
flat with her, his older brother and his favorite friend--his pet dog--a
mongrel named Sickan.
     Ingemar wonders several times throughout the film in voice-over
meditation, while we see the stars in the sky, just why the Russians had to
shoot Laika, the space dog, into outer space and, eventually, let her starve to
death as she circled the earth.  This, in actuality, is what is happening in
young Ingemar's life.  He is starving to death for understanding, affection
etc.  This metaphor develops throughout the film as Ingemar reflects on
different aspects of Laika's fate.  It is a powerful metaphor.
     However, the film is in no way morbid, for, when the mother gets too ill,
the boys are split up and sent away.  Ingemar is sent to an uncle's house which
is in a village built around a local glass-blowing industry.  Here his life
picks up and there are several quite eccentric characters in the village.  His
main relationship is with a young girl his own age who shows him how to box,
plays soccer on his team and yet must hide the fact that she's a girl.  Ingemar
relaxes more in the village, but, wherever he is, he is always portrayed as
just what he is--a young boy--nothing more, nothing less.
     Eventually, he is taken back home, but his mother is even less solicitous
now.  She has a relapse and he is packed off again to the village.  He is
happier there anyway, even though he must spend his nights now in the house of
an older woman whose husband has recently died.  All through these events the
metaphor of Laika's fate is interwoven.  His own dog, Sickan, has been put to
sleep, but the film does not dwell on such morbidity.
     Another theme which reveals itself in the film is the relaxed Swedish
attitude toward sex and Ingemar's basically healthy but equal lack of interest
in the subject.  In related sequences, a buxom young woman of about twenty has
him accompany her to the workshop of a local sculptor who has been commissioned
to do a statue of mother and child.  She poses naked on the floor while Ingemar
waits in a side room.  Ingemar's uncle has the hots for this young lady and
later asks him what she's like--piqueing Ingemar's interest and leading to a
funny situation as he falls through the skylight while trying to see her.
     The film is set somewhere in the late 1950's or early 1960's about the
time when Ingemar Johannson knocked out Floyd Patterson to win the heavyweight
championship of the world.  In the final scene the people are ecstatic over the
win and spill into the street shouting, "Ingemar didn't let us down.  He won
for Sweden!"  This metaphor's connection to young Ingemar's life is obvious,
and this is, in the last analysis, one of the weaknesses of the film.  It is
just a little too obvious.  It is such nuances of shading, I feel, that can
lift a movie from being good to being great.  The eccentric characters in the
village are also a bit much, but, even with these weaknesses, the film is most
certainly worth seeing.
     Some interesting things to watch for if you get to see this movie are: the
drabness of the cinematography which is in keeping with the main theme of the
story, the developing metaphor of Laika as it parallels Ingemar's own
existence, the Swedish attitude toward sex which differs profoundly from our
own, Ingemar's voice-overs when talking about Laika.  This last one deserves
some comment.
     The voice-overs don't hit you over the head as, say, Woody Allen's do in
the film HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  There Woody Allen talks about death as though
no one in the audience has ever had similar thoughts.  Such heavy-handedness is
a fault in the arts--another example might be Picasso's painting entitled
GUERNICA.  I don't know about you, but I resent it when the artist assumes that
his audience is too dull-witted to make any necessary connections so he,
himself, must hit them over the head.  MY LIFE AS A DOG perches precariously
all the way through on this invisible line.  Whether it succumbs in the very
end is debatable, but the fun times it offers along the way make it very
worthwhile.  The metaphor of Laika in Ingemar's voice-overs is very profound -
and moving.
     For myself it was a treat to see such a good Swedish film.  Even though
the Swedish is common colloquial speech, it was good to hear it again.  As a
young man I became infatuated with the Swedish language.  I guess I always will
be.  In this regard let me add one final artistic note.  When little Ingemar
goes to his uncle's village he is greeted by his uncle with "Welcome to
Smaland".  Smaland is a Swedish province; its name means small land, but, in
Swedish, the reference is to little Ingemar now being in his own land where
even the adults can act like children--a beautiful touch!  Let's hope that
there will be more such fine films coming to our shores soon from these
interesting people--the Swedes.

Title
Review for Worth Winning (1989)
     Judging from WORTH WINNING, America is in deep trouble!  I knew that the
film probably wouldn't be too good because it has Lesley Ann Warren in it, but
I went to see it anyway.  It is so deeply shallow that there's not a whole lot 
to be said about it.
     Most of us have seen the television show MOONLIGHTING no doubt.  Well if
you've seen MOONLIGHTING, you've seen WORTH WINNING.  WORTH WINNING, however,
is much more predictable.  Mark Harmon takes the place of Bruce Willis.  He
talks to the camera, explains his feelings, what's happening in the story, etc.
     Admittedly, I missed the very beginning because the Boston Globe with its
usual crummy quality control had the wrong start time printed.  But it didn't
matter.  This TV program that thinks it's a movie is such a formula flick that
you don't need to catch the opening to understand it.
     Here's the plot.  Two friends make a bet that one of them can/can't get
three women to agree to marry one of them.  He does, but falls for one.  The
women find out and turn the tables on him.  He repents and wins back the lady.
Pure hack!  
     This movie defines new lows in the consumer mentality that has overtaken
America.  It assumes that we are all part of a great era of dreck in which
reality is defined not by any drive to make ourselves better as individuals, as
a people, as a nation, but by our unblinking acceptance of the drivel of
consumerism.  We are no longer looked upon as thinking people, or even as film
audiences.  We are - media consumers!  Boy, does this flick ever make you feel
like an consumer!
     Lesley Ann Warren is one reason I went.  She is a wonderful, talented
lady.  It's a pity she seems to always appear in stuff that is way below her 
capabilities.  I don't know if she herself has the bad taste, her agent, the
casting directors, the producers?  I just don't know.  How awful to watch
someone loaded with talent consistently exploited in demeaning roles.  Of
course, she has considerable physical charms, but, while undoubtedly a reliable
aspect for manipulation of the audience, hormone production is best left where
it belongs - with pharmaceutical companies; Lesley Ann is wasted in this
outing.  There are so few good screen parts written for women that taking
someone as talented as Lesley and using her in a part like this should be made
part of the felony statutes.  Nevertheless, she does a good job in the
second-rate role of a vapid, repressed housewife.
     I can only hope that the producers and financiers of this piece of skit
will get to read reviews like this and somehow get it through their witless
skulls that vulgarities, jiggling tits, and a hack TV formula do not a movie
make.  They should stick to things they're best at, like manipulating the stock
market, or certain of their anatomical appendages.  This is not light comedy;
it's a comedy for air heads, which is what the producers apparently think of
their audience.  Do yourself a favor.  Miss this one even on cable.

Title
Review for Last Emperor, The (1987)
     Admittedly, I saw this movie in my local $2 house where the picture
wouldn't fit on the screen so the right-hand side wrapped around the wall and
waved on a curtain.  Although an interesting distraction, especially when the
emperor appeared to be literally two-faced, I think I saw enough of the film to
give my views on this Sino-Latin collaboration.
     One of the nice things about movie reviews is that they are often
refreshingly wrong.  I feel this is because when we see a film we filter it
through our own unique set of life experiences and the things we "see" are
those things to which we have become sensitive -- sort of like a group of
allergy patients sitting in a doctor's office.  I am no exception.  The things
I "see" you may say don't exist in the film or vice versa.  This is a healthy
phenomenon.  So, as a word of caution, if you haven't already seen this movie,
go see it for yourself; don't believe critics.  One man's meat is another man's
poison, as the saying goes.  I, myself, however, always read and believe
criticisms.  As Luis Bunuel I'm sure would comment about one of our national
weaknesses, "Those poor naive Americans."  Being half-English and half-Italian
has already made me the type who would shout, "Long live the King!" and then
take out a gun and shoot the bastard.  Just joking!  I think.
     Anyway, here are some of my ideas about the film: The movie was hard to
watch.  It was colder than a winter in Chicago.  Nonetheless, although I don't
think I could sit through it again, it makes important comments about the
lunacy of political power and, as it offers no alternatives other than
awareness of the problem, it is dreadful in its implications.
     The story, as the title suggests, is about the life of the last emperor of
China.  As a three-year-old he is installed in "The Forbidden City," and
everyone bows down to him.  He quickly gets the idea that he is superior to
others and can do almost anything he wants.  This is shown in the film to be
correct and incorrect at the same time.  Within "The Forbidden City," a symbol
of the emperor's own imprisonment, he is free to do whatever he wants, but he
is, indeed, not free to leave.  He is a puppet, if you will, to protect the
interests of those who put him in power in the first place.  Sound familiar?
     One very striking shot near the opening shows the young emperor and his
brother, who has been allowed to visit him, at the head of a long retinue of
heavily-robed functionaries, dias-bearers and so forth.  The emperor starts
running across an extremely expansive, stone-paved courtyard.  The retinue
speeds up to try and follow and they all end up going in a huge circle in the
courtyard.  The camera observes this from on high to emphasize how small they
are -- a bit of directorial virtuosity which caught me by surprise.  The emperor
leading the people in circles -- I wonder where that idea came from.
     While the emperor is thus cut off from the rest of the world, China
becomes a republic and the emperor becomes aware that it now has a president.
The feeling of his own imprisonment grows.
     Eventually, the emperor gets a tutor from Scotland who encourages him to
free himself.  The emperor, now around twenty, fires the old-guard and installs
a person to do an inventory on how much has been stolen from the storehouse.
The eunuchs, hundreds of them, burn the storehouse to the ground.  The emperor
says that this is to cover their thieving and, in a strange scene in which the
eunuchs carry their testicles in phials out into the courtyard -- wishing to be
buried as whole men -- we are lead to believe that they will be executed,
although, thankfully, we don't have to witness the mass executions.
Apparently, showing them would have made the emperor too hateful to the
audience and interfered with the main theme which I will get to.
     The film is largely based on the political history of China.  As such, it
follows the emperor's life into the period when he collaborated with the
Japanese in Manchuria.  It is a sad life in which the enslavement of China has
its parallel in the enslavement of the emperor -- he is merely a puppet again,
this time in the hands of the Japanese.
     When the Communists take over, the emperor is caught and spends ten years
in prison being reeducated, eventually becoming a gardener and dying in 1967.
Ironically, the Communist who reeducates him is portrayed as a kind teacher who
has a profound humanity.  Later, as the emperor walks the streets, he sees the
jailer forced to march in a parade of denunciation in which he is humiliated --
the vagaries of politics.  The emperor stands up for him, but is, in turn,
ridiculed by the young Chinese cultural revolutionaries who are just as much
under the spell of an illusion as the emperor ever was.  The circle is
complete.  The emperor has gone from illusion to disillusionment to awareness
only now to be ridiculed by the young Chinese Communist guards just starting
off on their own period of illusion.
     During the emperor's reeducation the moviemakers mix in footage of real
atrocities, such as the mass opium addiction of the Chinese, real executions,
as well as the attack on Pearl Harbor and the atomic bomb blast at Hiroshima.
This ties the movie, more than anything else, to our own reality.
     So is this picture a cinematic version of Machiavelli?  In some ways it
is.  Human nature doesn't change -- certainly a view of Machiavelli.  The
emperor loves Manchuria.  Machiavelli was a passionate lover of Florence.  The
corrupt nature of humanity is certainly present, but, perhaps it is best not to
drive the parallels too far, for the emperor's life is ultimately seen from the
point of view of a long period spent under the spell of an illusion and his
equally long period before breaking out of this psychic prison.  His struggle
consumed his whole life.  The implication, I think, is that ours could consume
the whole world.
     From almost any angle this movie is first-rate.  It even had a moment or
two of humor as when a Chinese band plays its version of "Auld Lang Syne" as a
send-off for the emperor's Scotch tutor.
     I don't quite know what to say about the coldness of the film.  In one way
it is totally apropos; it fits the subject matter perfectly.  On the other
hand, who wants to go see a cold movie?  All I can say is that I am really glad
to have seen this important film.  I would compare it to going to the dentist's
office to have your teeth drilled -- necessary, but not exactly an endearing
experience.  I salute the moviemakers -- this is a stupendous and important
film.  In a world asleep in its illusions, political power may just be the
greatest oxyMORON of all.

Title
Review for Fat Man and Little Boy (1989)
     It is said that after the Pythagoreans of ancient Greece discovered the
existence of irrational numbers they sought to keep it secret from the general
population.  Apparently because it contradicted their entire philosophical view
of the universe.  One story has it that they murdered a member of their own
sect, Hippasus, for telling outsiders the secret.  (See footnote 1.)
     A good portion of FAT MAN AND LITTLE BOY is frittered away recalling just
such secrecy as it regarded the development of the first atomic weapons.  The
title refers to the names of the two bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
and, by extension I suppose, to the two main characters in the film, J. Robert
Oppenheimer and General Leslie R. Groves.  If any film story ever deserved to be
treated in epic proportions, surely it must be this one.  But FAT MAN AND
LITTLE BOY is no epic.  To describe it succinctly, this movie's production fits
like Mickey Rooney's suit on Hulk Hogan.  It has a lot on nicely framed
cinematography, a couple of inspired moments of lighting and screenwriting, a
journeyman performance by Paul Newman, and little else to recommend it.
     The problems are numerous.  John Cusack is miscast as a scientist.  He
looks and acts more like a high school senior.  There are no characters for
whom to root.  In fact, J. Robert Oppenheimer is portrayed as a sort of
egomaniacal Commie psychopath who beguiles himself by his own seeming technical
omnipotence.  General Groves, the Pentagon man assigned to oversee the project,
would have been better named General Gross for this picture.  He has all the
moral finesse of some of the members of Ronald Reagan's regime.  The part is,
however, well-rendered by Paul Newman.  There are many seemingly insignificant
details that do this movie in.  For instance, the recent addition to the
language the word 'bimbo' is used.  Remember this story takes place in the
early forties.  Yogi Berra's oft-quoted statement, "It ain't over till it's
over," had not yet been uttered, much less popularized.  Modern looking diesel
locomotives had not yet completely replaced steam engines.  I myself can
remember going from Boston to Chicago with my mother in 1947 on a train with a
steam engine that had to be replaced at night because it was so loud it kept
people awake in the sleeper cars.  And the gigantic trainyards at Erie
Pennsylvania were chock full of steam giants with nary a diesel to be seen.
The score for this film, by Ennio Morricone, at one point makes a line of
trucks, meant, I suppose, to portray the earnestness of the project, look
ludicrous.  The material itself just does not lend itself to anything less than
epic proportions.  For one reason it is an historical drama.  We all know how
the story turns out.  This removed the crucial element of suspense from the
film.  But nothing stepped in to take its place, no characters to root for, no
convincing love interests, not even any emotional range - which goes from mad
to angry and back.  A film should definitely have a greater emotional range
than a mother-in-law.  :-)
     The production itself is expensive and authentic, except for what was
previously noted.  The drama in the production is "Who cares!"  If it weren't
for the fact that these awesome weapons still threaten us today, I don't think
anyone would have any reason at all to go see this film, except if maybe you be
an inveterate Paul Newman fan, or your mother-in-law has announced she's coming
over.
     Catch this one on cable and save your money for something more important
like a six-pack and TV wrestling on Saturday night.

Title
Review for Bright Lights, Big City (1988)
     Having heard that BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY had major flaws encouraged me to
let it slide.  I do that with too many films -- being loathe to support fluff
masquerading as substance.  However, my daughter wanted to see it so I went
with her and my wife to one of the $2 houses over the weekend.
     It is a paean to the present anti-cocaine hysteria.  The main character,
Jamie Conway, portrayed by Michael J. Fox, is a young fact checker and would-be
fiction writer at a staid magazine.  However, he spends most of his waking
hours snorting coke and debauching himself.   He is abetted in these pursuits
by Keifer Sutherland, who plays Tad Allagash, his coke-sniffing side-kick.
They live and work in Manhattan, but mostly they just snort coke.  
     It turns out that the movie gets into Fox's relationships with women and
this starts to lift it out of its "coke kills" message.  His wife has left him
and gone on a modeling assignment to Paris.  She tells him she will not be
back soon.  He is not sure what that means.  His cocaine activities get him
peripherally involved with female moral degenerates, but also with two women
rescuers -- an older co-worker who feeds and comforts him after he loses his
job through his coke compulsion, and the young college co-ed cousin of his
side-kick.  She is the wholesome, morally-upright counterpart to his wife, who 
seems to have done nothing but use him to launch her career.  Another important
relationship, and one which is exposed through flashbacks, is one with his
mother who has died from cancer a year previously.
     These nascent relationships would seem to give the moviemakers a wealth of
material upon which to draw, but, unfortunately, this movie is so concerned
with the cocaine message that resolving the problems with the relationships or
even developing them well enough so that we can fully understand them is
crudely sacrificed.  These intriguing relationships are immolated to a
simplistic and Hollywoodesque public service message that drug abuse is no
good.
     On the other hand, one of the few reasons for the present-day drug
epidemic is given by one of Fox's alcoholic co-workers played wonderfully by
Jason Robards.  At a liquid lunch he says something to the effect that Fox
should get an MBA and write about money, instead of trying to write fiction.
"Money -- greed is the latter-day poetry," he says.  However didactic this may
seem, in context, it works.
     The major flaw with the premise for this movie is that you can't just
bring up relationships, get the audience interested in them, and then leave
them all unresolved, even if that is part of the "message."  These
relationships proved more interesting for me than the perforated septum Fox's
character gets near the end.  I wanted to know more about them than about his
obsessive and disgusting habit.
     But, with all its faults, BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY is worth seeing.  Fox
shows that he really may have some genuine acting ability and the character
actors that populate the recesses of the movie are simply wonderful.  Although
the direction leaves lots of room for improvement and the the James Bridges
revamp of Jay McInerney's script has its share of faults, all in all, it's
worth seeing, especially at the $2 houses where it is presently making the
rounds.  If it weren't trying to go in two directions at the same time, I think
this movie could have hit big.
