Authors
the Rev. Mom
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
     Laurie Mann writes, "HAMLET is a superbly-produced version of
Shakespeare's play, with strong performances all around.  Zeffirelli
catches the look and feel of medieval Europe very well."
     I don't know if Laurie's saying the two things are linked, but my
personal taste runs in the other direction; I would have preferred
modern-dress.  We've got too many Hamlet's leaping around in doublet and
hose as it is.
     Actually, I knew from previous experience with Zeffirelli
Shakespearean films to expect huge cuts, Renaissance/medieval
dress/setting, and a more traditional interpretation (I bet 4:1 odds
with myself that Jones' Oedipal interpretation would rear its hoary old
head. :-)   Within these limitations, he does an excellent job; I just
don't like those limitations.  Especially when it comes to knee-jerk
interpretation.  
     "Mel Gibson gives a fine performance as Hamlet."
     Yes, definitely.  I have to admit I underestimated him, and he does
a great job with speaking the lines with understanding, clarity, and
above all, acting through them.  A really good job; I just don't like
the way Zeffirelli set most of the soliloquies away from the rest of the
action.  Helena Bonham-Carter did a great mad scene.  Glenn Close was a
wonderfully sympathetic Gertrude, and Alan Bates had a lot of fun being
a slightly gluttonous and lustful Claudius.
     But, not surprisingly Paul Scofield, and Ian Holm struck me as the
most effective actors in the movie.  Scofield, with the tiny role of the
Ghost nevertheless makes a lasting impression, and Ian Holm steals the
film in his scenes.  The advising of Laertes was wonderfully done
(although we don't get to see Polonius sending Reynaldo to spy on
Laertes in Paris), and I'm fully convinced that the "The very best
players for ..." bit was cut and then stuck back in (where it didn't
belong ) just because Holm was so much fun to watch.
     For the other Zeffirellia Shakespeare watchers out there, John
McEnery has had a bit of a comedown from Mercutio to Osric (and Osric
doesn't even get to blow hot and cold while toad-eating Hamlet with the
hat.)
     "Zeffirelli completely divorces HAMLET from theater, and opens up
the play by adding a few short scenes that had only been described in
the original.  While I tend to be a purist about original material,  the
additions keep true to the spirit of the play."
     Zeffirelli did the same thing in TAMING OF THE SHREW (e.g.  the
Wedding); he's fearless when it comes to adapting Shakespeare for his
needs.  
     And he tends to make good cuts.  I think most of the cuts were
probably necessitated by the commercial need to bring in a film under
three hours.  So, Act I, Scene i goes, because all the action in it is
later related by Horatio and then repeated.  Of course, the joke of
Hamlet saying, "Methinks I see my father" and Horatio yelping "Where, my
lord?!" is then lost, but it's worth it for the amount of time gained.
Even splitting Act I, Scene ii into three or four smaller bits is good,
because it shifts the focus onto the individual characters of Hamlet,
Gertrude and Claudius, which the audience needs to know.
     And naturally, he goes for the more common cuts: Fortinbras, the
dumbshow before the play-within-the-play, and Laertes *and* Hamlet both
jumping into Ophelia's grave in a macho display of I-loved-her-more-
than-you-did! are all gone.
     But by the time Hamlet gets to To Be or Not to Be in a crypt
--entirely divorced from where it's supposed to be (i.e., in a hall
where he knows he's being overheard by Claudius and Polonius, and where
Ophelia is laid as bait to trap him (--which was about three scenes
earlier, in which he *doesn't* launch into "Get thee to a nunnery!"),
and then about four or five scenes later when the play-within-the-play
is just about to start (which by the way, we don't know is of Hamlet's
authorship, because the "Speak the speech" bit was cut) and Hamlet says
"That's a fair thought to lie between maid's legs" (shocking all those
people who thought this was high art :-), and *then* turns to Ophelia
and starts railing "Get thee to a nunnery!" which was from the scene
before which didn't have the soliloquy ... you start to wonder if maybe
there wasn't a little *too* much violence done to the text.
     Call me an anal-retentive Shakespeare snob (I am one, anyways), but
I *missed* "The rugged Phyrrus.."  bit and then the subsequent necessary
line cuts from "Oh what a rogue and peasant slave..."  I *like* the
jokes in HAMLET.  I missed it when Zeffirelli cut "What's his weapon?"
"Rapier and dagger."  "That's *two* of his weapons..." because he
wanted the final scene to look like a bash-em-up fight/duel with big
blades, and then climax with them swinging two big swords apiece, rather
than have anything so finicky as a four-bladed-fencing-match-with-wimpy-
foils-and-daggers.  (I couldn't help snorting, when Laertes, after
*slicing* Hamlet has to tell him the sword is unbated.  Yeah, right,
like Hamlet hasn't figured that it's not a blunt blade.)
     All of Zeffirelli's choices *are* made for a purpose, and this
movie is admirably straightforward and powerful in telling the story of
HAMLET.  But while the movie is undoubtedly HAMLET, it's HAMLET with
most of the texture (all puns intended) rubbed off.  It's fun, it's
worth seeing; but be aware that it's a simplification.
     At least now people are primed to see Stoppard's ROSENCRANZ AND
GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD.  :-)

Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast (1991)
     All the reviews are true.  It's *won*derful.  Rush to see it on the
22nd, it is *more* than worth the $7.50 I paid to see it at the El
Capitan in LA.  It deserves to be nominated for Best Picture.
     The animation is amazing.  Pixar's done a marvelous job of
background generations, giving us scenes that are a perfect marriage of
generated and hand-drawn animation.  It blends beautifully.  The
ballroom is breathtaking, the chandelier is wonderful, and if someone
hadn't told me, I wouldn't have known about Maurice's carriage.
     The score's got everything from beautiful soaring ballads to
get-'em-on-their-feet showstoppers.
     It's poignant, touching, charming, exhilarating, and all that good
stuff.  Prepare for tears, choking up, belly laughs--it's not often you
get touched like this by a movie.  THE LITTLE MERMAID was just the warm
up.  :-)  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is chock full of Moments.
     And, of course, the characters are *great*!  Robby Benson was the
perfect choice for the Beast's voice--he manages to convey both the
ferocity of a wild beast with immense power (combine a bear-sized
wolverine with a panther, and you get the movement and build) and the
utter vulnerability of a man discovering love for the first time.  And
yes, his voice is deep, and yes he sings.  Paige O'Hara's voice for
Belle, while similar to Jodie Benson's in range, conveys a very
different character, more worldly, confident and mature.  The opening
scene draws her character for you, so I won't ruin it with long
descriptive sentences.
     I don't want to ruin the movie for anyone (and I especially want to
warn anyone with the Disney Channel that "The Making of" special has
lots of spoiler scenes), so I'm not going to mention fave lines (other
than the one in my .sig I can't resist) or moments, but I did want to
say there's one piece of trivia that should delight fans of the TV
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (you remember Linda Hamilton?  :-)--look at the
castlist to see who plays the asylum keeper.
     Even the credits are wonderful; someone finally did things right,
and listed the credits by character, naming the voice actor, animating
director and animators for each main character as a group.  And
especially throat-lump-inducing was the final dedication:
