Authors
Ken Furlong
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
     The opening credit sequence of any film can tell you a great deal
about the director's emotional attachment to the task at hand.
Occasionally, an inspired director will hire Elaine and Saul Bass, who
are credited with creating some of the most memorable opening credit
sequences in American film history.  Remember PSYCHO?  Scorsese's remake
of CAPE FEAR?
     The nightmarish world of David Fincher's SEVEN opens with the
daring and detail that one would expect from a careful, dark
combination of manipulation and terror.  The film is beautiful in its
dark tones, in the way an armchair melts to black in a corner of the
screen with the rain falling hard, even like a sheet.  There is a
desperation present in this film that is tangible in the way paint can
sometimes be.  A street corner, a lonely bedroom takes on the mellow,
moody tone of a Hopper glow, slowly exposing a black and white world in
colour.
     SEVEN actually looks black and white in some of these early
compositions and the spare dialogue, the quiet looks allow you to
linger and explore in the darkness.  Fincher possesses a solid vision
of urban sickness, and he leaves you wanting more.
     All this production design lends an accomplished touch to a simple
plot.  Veteran homicide detective (Morgan Freeman) gets assigned a
young, volatile partner (Brad Pitt) in a serial killer case of Biblical
proportions.  Freeman does an exceptional job at convincing us of the
loneliness and frustration of a cop who's spent a lifetime trying to
create an impossible personal/urban environment where no one gets
hurt.  In a role that depends more on gesture than speech, he has
delivered a performance as graceful as anything he's done.  It is a
textured portrait of dedication that prefers to communicate through a
look rather than a line.  Of course, he sees his raw partner as he once
saw himself.  Hopeful, passionate, destined to fail.
     It's corny.  It's derivative.  With the right direction and
casting, it works every time.
     It's the structural, manipulative gymnastics that always leave the
audience feeling worked over in the creepy, appealing ride of a
confident thriller.  But suspense and terror, though attractive, can't
always be enough.  SEVEN successfully keeps you busy enough to ignore
its flaws; the unnecessary buddy movie humour, the female figure as
plot necessity.  It does so by following a carefully constructed and
boldly executed structure that allows an audience little energy to
reflect, to analyse.
     One obvious example is a chase scene of Hitchcockian dimensions
engineered and placed very carefully in the centre of the film.  It is
one of the main reasons David Fincher should be recognised as a major
visual stylist.
     Brad Pitt, when given the right role (young, ambitious, and a
little on the dull side) has finally proven he can deliver.  His work
is actually believable here.
     But the real star of this black, oppressive mass is the urban hell
that seeps from the screen in every interior, every impressionist
study.  Fincher has created a world that is at once completely over the
top and completely authentic.  While confidently creating mystery in
its imperfections, SEVEN hints at a director who may be ready for more
than manipulation.
