Authors
Choo Eng Aun
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Assassins (1995)
Starring : Sylvester Stallone, Antonio Banderas, Julian Moore
Directed by : Richard Donner
Running Time : 2hrs
     Team up the Italian Stallion with The Spanish El-Mariachi into one
film and call up Richard (LETHAL WEAPON 1,2 & 3, MAVERICK) Donner to
direct it, looks like a sure hit right?  Wrong!  This the second movie
for Stallone this summer (he reportedly got paid US$50 million to do
three movies this year) and the second bomb for him this year after the
dismal response for the high budget sci-fi flick, JUDGE DREDD.  While,
Sly's career seems to be going downhill, his Spanish counterpart (who
can actually speak better than him!) is on his way up.  Banderas also
starred in DESPERADO, a high octaned action film with the bodycount
higher than all the RAMBO movies put together, which incidentally may
not pass the censors here, I hope not!!
     Stallone is Robert Rath, the best hired gun money can buy.  He's
been on the business for many years and can be considered a veteran of
that trade.  From the starting sequences, we see that Rath is getting
tired (bored?) and seemingly a little frustrated about the direction of
his life, retirement is on his mind, but its not exactly one job one
can just quit so easily.  His life was immediately made more
interesting with the appearance of Miguel Bain (Antonio Banderas), a
psychotic, semi-lunatic hired gun, who `steals' Rath's contracts by
killing the targets before he can get to them, in the beginning we are
made to think that Miguel is just some crazy hired-gun who is trying
very hard to be oust Rath and be no.1 in the trade but as the story
unfolds, a greater plot ensues.
     The love interest, (I shall call her Cat, couldn't catch the name)
played by Julian Moore, a small time hacker with no real identity and
gets entangled in something much more than she would ever imagine.  Cat
started out being the prime target of a hit but ended up being saved by
Rath from Miguel.  For once, there's a decent plot in a Stallone movie
and although slightly predictable, is quite interesting + enjoyable.
     Stallone fares well here, partly due to the fact that he speaks
very much less than most of his other movies.  Banderas's Miguel was
totally cool ... toting around town in in his sweaty,
psychotic-appearance, Latino looks and a "Speedy Gonzales" accent, his
character easily outshines Stallone's Rath.  Is this a precedence in
action movies today?  Most baddies seem to take the front seat from the
hero.
     All in all, there's a lot of creative shoot-outs in this film (very
John Woo, but on a more believable level), enough explosives and
suspense to satisfy most action lovers.  But there are time when the
action tries a bit too hard, only to end up being totally boring and
predictable.  Richard Donner is an exceptional action film director and
it is sad to see his film not doing well, maybe he should team up with
Gibson again in another LETHAL WEAPON movie, I'll like that.  If you're
an action fan, this film should prove to be quite enjoyable, Banderas
is pure fun to watch.

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
Starring : Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante, Joan Chen,
           Jurgen Prochnow, Rob Schneider, Diane Lane.
Produced by : Andrew Vajna
Directed by : Danny Cannon
Running Time : 1hr 30mins (approx)
A Hollywood Pictures Release
     The future for earth is bleak.  Our home planet has turned mostly
into desert (global warming?) and pollution is worse than anyone could
imagine.  The harsh conditions has earned Earth the term 'The Cursed
Earth.'  People no longer live anywhere they wish, all of them cram
into Mega Cities (very-very large cities), which brings us to Mega City
One, Dredd's very own playground.  In Mega Cities, the higher up the
building you live, the safer you are, the higher your status.  Down on
the street, crime and chaos rules.  The normal judiciary system is no
longer useful in bringing justice to Mega Cities, there is just too
much chaos.  Instead, police-cum-army-cum-judge enforcers are
deployed.  Judgement is passed by the arresting judge as soon as
wrongdoers are arrested.
     Based on the phenomenal British comic series of the same title,
JUDGE DREDD showcases lots of dead bodies (as in the comics) and some
really impressive action sequences laced with goo-goo-bytes of computer
generated special effects.  Judge Dredd (Stallone) prowl Mega City One,
passing judgement on those he arrests.  Meanwhile, a notorious villian,
Rico (Assante) escapes from a penal colony, wreaks chaos in Mega City
One and also contributes to the tons of bodies already donated by
Dredd.  The sets are lavish, the computer generated city is
breathtaking but the costumes, well...a bit too colourful and clean to
be taken seriously.
     The plot is typical of most of Hollywood's action films; just
about as thin as the air in outer space.  I was lucky to have a Judge
Dredd comic fan sitting next to me, and he explained nearly all of the
jargon and culture that only Dredd fans would know.  I actually enjoyed
the movie quite a bit.  The introduction was a bit corny but the thick
action helped erase that negative thought.  There is enough action to
satisfy action-hungry and entertainment-seeking movie goers but the
ending really really does leave a lot to be desired.  The script, too,
proved too corny at times but hey, so were most of Stallone's previous
action flicks.
     Stallone is his usual self; minimal dialogue, 'action speaks
louder than words.'  Assante, though physically less appealing than
Stallone, managed to play the psychotic Rico rather well.  Apart from
the really weak, anti- climactic ending, JUDGE DREDD is a pretty
polished action movie.  I particularly liked the fast-paced chase
sequence around, on top and under the buildings of Mega City One.  The
ABC War Machine which Rico uses as his bodyguard was really menacing.
You'll probably like this movie if you don't mind the ending (highly
unlikely) or you're a true blue Stallone or Judge Dredd comic fan.

Title
Review for Species (1995)
Starring : Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Alfred Molina, Natasha Kentsridge
Produced by : Frank Mancuso Jr., Dennis Feldman
Music by : Christopher Young
Directed by : Roger Donaldson
`Sil' created by H.R.Giger
Running time : 1hr 40mins (approx)
A United International Pictures Release
     For fans of the ALIEN trilogy, SPECIES would have to do, at least
for now.  It is a good `alternative' ALIEN movie.  The creature, SIL, was
designed by world-renowned artist H. R. Giger who also incidentally
designed the original creature in ALIEN and also the variant in ALIEN
3.  If you simply can't get enough of the ferocious Xenomorph from the
ALIEN trilogy, well, SIL will definitely live up to your expectation,
except its much sleeker and not to mention smarter too.
     The movie does not wait.  SIL, a product of human embryo and alien
DNA is to be terminated due to some complications to the secret alien
research project.  What seems to be a normal young female, escapes the
facility, thanks to her superhuman abilities due to the alien genes in
her veins.  A trail of blood and gore follows from then on, with a
group of researchers, led by Kingsley hot on her trail.  There are a
lot of suspenseful situations (things jumping out etc.), sometimes, a
bit too much for comfort, your truly here did jump a bit on several
occasions so those with pacemakers, keep a backup just in case.
SPECIES also showcases some really good special effects, with Sil
transforming from human to alien and also all those tendrils which
explodes out from inside of her (yech!).
     The characters though, are as two dimensional as they can get but
hey, it is not as if those looking for some action and entertainment
even care.  Ben Kingsley gives his worst performance yet, in this film
(Maybe he's trying to break into the mainstream market in the likes of
DUSTIN HOFFMAN in OUTBREAK).  The star of the show without a doubt is
Sil herself.  The young girl who played her when she was a child was
quite memorable, thought short in duration but it is newcomer NATASHA
KENTSRIDGE who fared the best.  Granted that her role was not exactly a
tough one but she did manage to potray
the-beautiful-woman-with-that-deadly-secret very well.  Her Sil will
make men think twice before making out with a beautiful women, watch
and see!  She looked a bit like Schiffer if you ask me.  I would have
liked it even more if only they dealt more into the human-alien
conflict within Sil.
     Sad to say, the Singaporean version of SPECIES is about ten minutes
shorter, no thanks to the censorship board here.  The PG rating has
really taken its toll on the film.  Much of the explicit killing scenes
were butchered and Sil, who was practically topless 50% of the time,
was 100% clothed in this version.  Damn, should have given it an R(A)
rating; it isn't exactly a movie kids should watch anyway.
Nevertheless, I still found the movie enjoyable and is definitely one
of the better entertainment-film for this summer.

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     APOLLO 13 is simply one of the most dramatic film this summer
(apart from swashbuckling BRAVEHEART). Director (and former actor) Ron
Howard (SPLASH, BACKDRAFT, FAR & AWAY), most noted for his dramatic
film making, displays again his brilliance in creating drama and
suspense in APOLLO 13. Being the second largest box office hit in the
US this summer (with more than US$150 million in the states alone),
this film is his most successful effort yet.
     Perhaps one of the most appealing feature of this film is the
pool of talented actors such as Tom Hanks (GUMP himself), Kevin Bacon
(FOOTLOOSE, TREMORS, A FEW GOOD MEN etc.), Gary Sinise (FORREST GUMP),
Bill Paxton (ALIENS, TRUE LIES, BOXING HELENA) and Ed Harris (THE
ABYSS, JUST CAUSE)..  all of whom gave good performances in their
respective roles.
     Apollo 13 was the second worst accident ever to occur in the
history of US spaceflight (the worst being the Challenger accident).
Jim Lovell (HANKS), the mission commander, together with his crew, Fred
Haise (PAXTON) and last minute replacement Tom Swigert (BACON) are put
to the ultimate test when part of their command module explodes on the
third day of the mission, more than three quarters way to the moon.
Suspense and drama ensue as the three men are left in space with their
spaceship out of control and the problem of surviving the journey
home ... if they ever reach it.
     Ed Harris and Gary Sinise who play, respectively, the man in
charge of the entire mission control and the astronaut who was supposed
to fly but was diagnosed with measles, both delve into their roles
superbly. Audiences are shown the chaotic and worrisome state of the
entire ground control crew, as they frantically attempt to come up with
ideas on how to save the astronauts from hurtling into space.  Also,
there are quite a number of real news footages which were broadcast
during the accident which took the entire US nation into 5 days of
drama in 1970.
     The special effects by Digital Domain are up to standard and the
music suits the suspense and drama very well, thanks to film-music
maestro James Horner.  Watch out for the launching sequence, it is
simply one of the most breathtaking scenes of the film. A bad point
though: APOLLO 13 features much technical jargon and many physics
concepts in its script.  Those who consider themselves `scientifically
illiterate' might have a slight problem understanding what caused this
and what caused that during the course of the show. This is however,
just a minor point, just forget all those technical bullshit and
immerse yourselves into the drama and suspense throughout the film. You
should enjoy it.

Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
     With stars like Sigourney Weaver ("Alien" trilogy) and Academy
Award Winner Holly Hunter (THE PIANO, RAISING ARIZONA, etc.) together
in a single Hollywood production, one would immediately identify the
film as a potential Academy Award hot shot.  Sadly for COPYCAT, though
tightly scripted and nicely plot, is still at heart, a typical
Hollywood thriller.
     Helen (Weaver), after a traumatic near death encounter with a
serial killer, Darryl (Harry Connick Jr.), has developed a phobia for
being outdoors, so to speak.  Incidentally, Helen is also an expert on
the subject of serial killers, which make her a juicy target for serial
killer wannabes.  A year has passed and strange deaths begin to
terrorise the city of San Francisco.  Detective Monahan (Hunter) and
Getz (Mulroney), baffled by the unorthodox methods of killing used by
the killer, seeks the professional help of Helen, who, as expected was
reluctant at first.
     COPYCAT "borrows" a lot from SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and in most
cases, it did work.  But COPYCAT tries to be a little bit more by
immersing the audience into the lives of its main characters to give
them more believability, this was rather unnecessary as the scenes seem
to disrupt the mood of the entire film and also ... much of the time
wasted could've been used to build up the suspense and injected with
drama.  Even so, Weaver and Hunter act very well in their own
departments ...  Weaver being the vulnerable yet strong-within
character (as in Aliens) and Hunter being the short, tough, Texan
speaking cop (as in Raising Arizona).  Harry Connick Jr., a very good
jazz singer, shines as the imprisoned serial killer a la Hannibal
Lecter.
     Which comes to the moment of judgement (drum roll please...).
COPYCAT is a good thriller.  Although the plot is highly predictable
and one can actually predict the rest of the movie after about 45
minutes into the show, COPYCAT survives from the moments of
anticipation where the audience are held on to their seats, in
anticipation of the killers next immediate move.  This worked pretty
well and will offer audiences a couple of unexpected jolts.  Nice movie
to bring your girlfriend to....
