Authors
J. C. Deck
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hear My Song (1991)
     It's just too bad that a fine film like this one won't get the
exposure of, say, STOP, OR MY MOTHER WILL SHOOT so that lots of
audiences could see excellence in film production.  HEAR MY SONG
provides us with humor, romance, human interest, and some really
colorful characters.  
     The only stars familiar to United States viewers in the film are
Ned Beatty and David McCallum (of THE MAN FROM U.N.C.L.E. fame).
McCallum has a minor role but plays it to the hilt.  And Ned
Beatty--who'd have thought that Lex Luthor's assistant in SUPERMAN was
also a major league actor?  By the way, I watched the credits carefully
and that's *not* Jack Elam as one of Beatty's buddies.  Everyone else is
just superb (I liked the Ryan sisters).  The plot moves very well and is
so well photographed that Ireland's tourist authority should underwrite
the scenes set in Ireland.  The comedy is great (the cow scene provoked
the audience to laugh aloud) and the music is fine.  Try to see this
film in a theater with a better-than-average sound system: it will add
to your viewing pleasure.
     One last note, the character played by Ned Beatty is a real-life
living person--that fact is like the cherry atop a fine, soda fountain
sundae which emulates the pleasurable experience that viewing this
movie provides.  Don't wait for the video on this one, you'll lose a bit
o' the magic on the small screen.  This one deserves to be seen at full
price--you'll get your money's worth.
