Authors
Jon Drukman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Abyss, The (1989)
     Director James Cameron has a big reputation to live up to, having helmed
action classics like THE TERMINATOR and ALIENS and fans of his early works will
certainly go to see THE ABYSS expecting something special.  Fortunately,
they'll get something close to a masterpiece, certainly not the "instant
classic" that the newspaper headlines blare at us, but a good entertaining
movie, nonetheless.
     The plot isn't super-relevant, as Cameron's eye is tilted more towards
creating a sombre atmosphere, and characterizations.  One unusual thing about
the film is the way it opens: you see the logo THE ABYSS with the tail on the
"y" hanging down, the camera zooms into the "y" and WHAM! the film starts -- no
credits, no nothing.  This was a very effective technique, because you find
yourself plunged into Cameron's vision instantly and totally.
     The underwater scenes are beautifully shot, and they practically steal the
film away, much the way the gorgeous sets and camerawork stole the show from
the lame script of BATMAN.  The characters, which Cameron has confessed to
making his number one priority in the film, seem a bit flat when confronted
with the billions of dollars of technology surrounding them, although Ed Harris
delivers a highly competent performance.  Michael Biehn did a commendable job
at portraying a psycho military officer without any of the usual Hollywood
"over the edge" cliches.  His performance was a masterwork of restraint, if
anything.  Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, on the other hand, was annoying from
frame one, although this might be considered a success as her character was
supposed to be a "cast-iron bitch."  Her softening at the end was predictable
and not very well executed.  
     In fact, the ending of the film in general was not very well executed.
Certainly, the effects and camera work were up to par, but the plot took a
standard Hollywood nosedive.  Why is it that so few films are willing to take
risks and show us a world where everyone doesn't live happily ever after?
Presumably, the idealistic worldview is justified by studio management as being
"escapist" entertainment, with the rationale being that people go see movies to
feel better about the world, but implausibly saccharine endings such as the one
in THE ABYSS leave this reviewer feeling much worse about the world.
     Cameron may see THE ABYSS as a love story first, but it seems as if he is
more in love with the machinery of the film than the characters.  Still, some
viewers will find that desirable, and the mastery of the film craft that
Cameron shows will pay off for them.  Just ignore the hopelessly hokey ending,
and you'll have a good time.
+------------------------------------+
|  |   |\        | jsd@gaffa.mit.edu |
| \|on |/rukman  | jsd@umass.bitnet  |
+------------------------------------+
