Authors
Craig-Richard Schock
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Freejack (1992)
     This has got to be one of the worst movies ever made.  I went
with a friend and he knew the manager of the theatre; we both got in
free but I still feel like I didn't get my money's worth.
     The screenplay was awful.  I saw in the opening credits that the
movie is based on a novel.  Although I have not read the novel, I
can't imagine that it could possibly as bad as the movie.  Watching
the movie, I got the impression that there was more to the story and
that it could be found in the book.
     All of the characters in this movie can be described with one
word: plastic.  I have never before seen a movie where the
depthlessness of the characters has been so annoying that it
completely disrupted my enjoyment of the story.  Mick Jagger didn't
get one line "right."  His character was some macho-moron straight out
of the seventies.
     What's left?  Hopefully there were some excellent special effects
or great cinematography.  Well, sorry to disappoint you.  The special
effects are from the early '80s (a little later than Jagger's
character :-).  My friend said it the best when he said that the
special effects were "cheesy."
     I have never before felt so uncomfortable sitting through a
movie.  With it's bad acting, poor dialogue, awful screenplay,
horrible characters I find it really hard to say anything good about
this movie.  If you really want to see it, wait for the video. 
There's nothing in this movie you will miss by not seeing it on the
big screen.
