Authors
Deb Taylor
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     I read LOST MOON just recently and found it to be fascinating, but
I wondered about the book's translation into film, whether or not the
truly hair-raising events of Apollo 13 would become entangled in the
engaging but smaller events in life of Jim Lovell, astronaut.
     Last night, at a sneak preview showing of APOLLO 13, I was pleased
to see that Director Ron Howard decided to concentrate on "America's
most successful failure" with outstanding results.  Not only was I
completely riveted by this excellent dramatization of real-life events,
but I was caught up in the concept that three men in a tiny capsule,
thousands of miles from Earth, can still make the whole world look up
to something much larger than themselves.  (Of course, sitting for over
an hour and a half in the cramped, hard seats of the University
auditorium gave APOLLO 13 more than a little sense of virtual reality
for me personally).
     The casting was near perfect.  Tom Hanks played Jim Lovell as a
smart, humorous, and truly brave individual who knows what leadership
means--no matter what the circumstances.  The supporting cast was a
treat, including Kathleen Quinlin as Mrs. Lovell.  ILM, which I
understand did most if not all of the space flight footage, should
probably get an Oscar.  The sound-track was powerful without being
obtrusive.
     This is a definite *must see* movie for 1995.  Go, even if you
witnessed the original harrowing Apollo 13 mission (like I did)
starring Walter Cronkite.   This movie is really about a phenomenal
rescue, a subject all us love.
