Authors
Dennis Putman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Forces of Nature (1999)
Directed by Bronwen Hughes.
Cast: Ben Affleck, Sandra Bullock, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe 
Danner, Ronny Cox, Meredith Scott Lynn, Michael Fairman, Anne Haney.
1999 - 102 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed March 20, 1999.
After viewing "Forces of Nature," it was apparent that the film had 
attempted to be a little more off-beat, and a little more 
unconventional, than your normal romantic comedy, and credit should go 
to screenwriter Marc Lawrence and director Bronwen Hughes for lifting 
this one slightly above mediocrity, but they didn't go far enough. What 
might have been an original romance ultimately turned out to more often 
than not just as cliched as the rest of the worn-out genre, sort of like 
1987's far superior "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles" if Steve Martin or 
John Candy had had a sex change.
Ben Holmes (Ben Affleck), a blurb writer for book jackets, is a New 
Yorker only days away from getting married to his fiancee, Bridget (Mara 
Tierney), down at her family's victorian home in Savannah, Georgia. 
After getting on the airplane to travel up there, he meets Sarah (Sandra 
Bullock), a slightly off-kilter but bewitching young woman, who happens 
to be seated next to him. Even before the plane is able to get off the 
ground, a pigeon accidentally flies into one of the engines, causing the 
plane to crash and knocking Sarah unconcious. Once Sarah comes to, she 
is overly grateful to Ben, whom she suddenly kisses and exclaims, "you 
saved my life," while he is on the phone with Bridget to let her know he 
is alright. Since Ben and Sarah are both headed for Savannah, they 
decide to make their way up there together, all the while constantly 
running into various transportation and weather hurdles. Strangely 
enough, Ben begins to hear a lot of negative stories about marriage 
during this journey, and begins to question his impending marriage, as 
well as his blossoming relationship with Sarah.
Although you may think you know where this story is headed, you're most 
likely wrong, since one of the strongest things about "Forces of Nature" 
are the chances it takes, particularly for a mainstream romantic comedy, 
so that everything cannot be as easily predicted as expected. When the 
climactic moment came, set at a hurricane-swept wedding, the outcome was 
satisfying and realistic, and I appreciated this approach that was 
taken. 
Unfortunately for all involved, what comes before the conclusion is 
basically well-traveled territory that wasn't exactly crying out to be 
reworked for the umpteenth time. The middle section, especially, as we 
follow Ben and Sarah in cars, on trains, and on a bus filled with 
elderly vacationers travelling to Miami, often came off as bland and 
uninteresting, as Ben and Sarah possibly begin to fall in love. All the 
obstacles in their way, of course, are nothing but plot contrivances to 
get the two people together, and it was this section of the film that 
was such a letdown, and nowhere near as entertaining or funny as some of 
the best road movies (1983's "National Lampoon's Vacation" and the 
aforementioned "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles," immediately come to 
mind).
On the upside of things, Sandra Bullock is finally in the right 
direction after some blaringly bad film choices (1997's "Speed 2," her 
most annoying performance to date, and 1998's goofy, wildly misguided 
"Practical Magic"), but something tells me she should try something a 
little different next time, rather than yet another tiresome romance. 
Ben Affleck here has also found his best role since probably 1997's 
"Chasing Amy," and it is a big, big step up from last year's 
embarrassment, "Armageddon," as he has a great comic flare and perfect 
chemistry with Bullock. Screenwriting Lawrence is ultimately not as kind 
in his treatment of the supporting characters in "Forces of Nature." 
Tierney, as Ben's fiancee, Bridget, is disappointingly looked upon as 
more of a caricature than a real person, which is something that really 
perturbs me in movies featuring main characters who are "big stars." 
Blythe Danner and Ronny Cox, as Bridget's parents, mostly disappear into 
the background, but there is a funny turn here by Meredith Scott Lynn, 
as the bride's maid who comes into contact with Ben and Sarah on their 
way to Savannah. Lynn, a standout in 1998's "Billy's Hollywood Screen 
Kiss," deserves wide screen acclaim, maybe not for this film since she 
has very little to do, but hopefully in the future.
One of the highlights in "Forces of Nature" is the beautiful, mystifying 
cinematography by Elliot Davis, which paints a fantasy-style portrait of 
the several different types of extreme weather in the film. In one 
magical sequence, Ben and Sarah get stuck outside in a hail storm, via 
slow-motion, and we are able to see the hail, looking like heavenly 
crystals, falling gracefully from the sky. Meanwhile, the hurricane that 
arrives in the climax at the wedding, causes the various colorful 
napkins and decorations to star flowing around the characters, as if 
they are in a tornado crossed with a bright rainbow.
"Forces of Nature" is a sometimes enjoyable film, and Affleck and 
Bullock worked wonderfully together, but aside from the ending, why did 
the premise have to follow such a strict pattern of the usual cliches 
and plot devices that we so often see in movies of this type? Are there 
some set of rules I don't know about that have to be abided, no matter 
what, by the filmmakers of romantic comedies? While far from a complete 
misfire, "Forces of Nature" remains simply too by-the-numbers to be 
particularly gratifying or worthwhile.
