Authors
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Long Kiss Goodnight, The (1996)
The Long Kiss Goodnight (R) *** (out of ****)
        Meryl Streep tried it and failed.  Even Pamela Anderson Lee made an
attempt but fell flat on her well-bared assets.  However, Geena Davis could
very well become the first bankable American female action star with The
Long Kiss Goodnight, a preposterous but incredibly fun action thriller
directed by her husband, Renny Harlin.
        Davis plays Samantha Caine, a mousy suburban school teacher and
mother whose memories only go back eight years.  With the help of ethically
questionable private detective Mitch Hennessey (Samuel L. Jackson), she
slowly remembers--and reclaims--her past as Charly Baltimore, tough-as-nails
CIA operative.  Needless to say, with the reappearance of Samantha/Charly
comes the appearance of an assortment of no-goodniks out to erase more than
her memory.
        Shane Black netted a cool $4 mil for his script; I'm not so sure if
his prose is truly deserving of such a hefty price tag, but for what it's
worth, it delivers the goods.  Like Black's previous work, such as Lethal
Weapon and The Last Boy Scout, the script juggles some impressive action
scenes with funny, quirky dialogue.  The humor especially works well in this
case, for the story is so preposterous that the laughs help to keep things
from taking things too seriously.  But there's no argument that the more
unbelievable sequences are original and entertaining as hell: who can resist
the sight of Davis tossing her daughter from a hole in her house into the
nearby treehouse or chasing after a car... while ice skating?
        Jackson and Davis make a good team.  Jackson is funny as ever as
ever; in fact, his spirited line deliveries, especially when he first
appears, are more than reminiscent of his work as Jules in Pulp Fiction.  As
good as he is, the one who should benefit the most from this project is
Davis, who shows much promise as an action heroine.  What makes her so
effective and why she should succeed where Streep and Lee failed is that she
doesn't take herself too seriously.  She is obviously in on the joke, slyly
taking jabs at herself and at the situation.  This is not to say that she
doesn't need work--sometimes she lays on the "toughness" a bit too thick and
comes off too much as a caricature.  But should the public embrace the film
and, in turn, the notion of a kick-ass female, Davis could have found her
special niche.
        It seems as if Davis and Harlin's first collaboration, the middling
pirate epic Cutthroat Island, was just a dress rehearsal (albeit a very
costly one) for Long Kiss, in which the wife-husband team hit their action
stride.  Anyone simply looking for a fun, escapist entertainment that
requires little-to-no thinking will find this film to be a more-than-welcome
Kiss.

Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
That Thing You Do! (R) *** (out of ****)
        Tom Hanks's screenwriting and directorial debut, That Thing You Do!,
has all the qualities you would associate with the most beloved screen actor
of the moment: fun, lively, and oh-so-nice.  It is the latter quality,
however, that becomes a hindrance, for this '60s nostalgia trifle is so nice
and sweet that it teeters on becoming bland milquetoast.
        That Thing focuses on the Wonders, a teen rock band from Erie,
Pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964
when they score a major dance hit called, of course, "That Thing You Do!"
The group's members are, naturally a diverse group: there's brooding lead
singer and songwriter Jimmy (Johnathon Schaech); girl-crazy Lenny (Steve
Zahn), the lead guitarist; a goofy, geeky type known only as The Bass Player
(Ethan Embry); and the film's center, Guy (Tom Everett Scott), the drummer
who has aspirations in jazz.  Along for the Wonders' ride to success is
Jimmy's perpetually neglected galpal, Faye (Liv Tyler).
        Hanks proves to be a capable writer-director, deftly recreating the
innocent spirit of 1964, which Hanks calls "the last innocent year."  The
spirit is not only reflected in the period clothes and settings but also in
the music, which, like the other recent period music film, Grace of My
Heart, was expressly written for the film; Hanks himself had a hand in
writing four of the tunes--but not the infectious title cut by Adam
Schlesinger, which is guaranteed to stay in your head long after the end
credits have rolled (it's still playing in my mind as I write this).  It
should come as no surprise that Hanks the director works well with the
actors, eliciting charming, likable work from the entire cast, most notably
Hanks lookalike Scott and Tyler, who is remarkable in delivering the film's
biggest and best dramatic moment.  The work of the young ensemble is so
natural that they truly convince as teens of the early '60s; they do not
appear to be '90s grungers playacting "retro."
        Yet for all the light, frothy charms of That Thing You Do!, it's
nearly nice to a fault.  While this unbridled innocence in film is a
refreshing change from all the sinful cinema around these days, there is not
enough conflict to keep things consistently interesting.  Everyone is so
happy, basking in the glow of overnight success, marvelling at it
all--except toward the end, but even then the tone quickly reverts to
sweetness, ending on an appropriately feel-good note.  There isn't much of
an edge throughout That Thing--the only thing that is remotely edgy is
Hanks's turn as the Wonders' manager--and thus becomes in danger of being so
nice it's bland.
        But a little niceness goes a long way these days, and there's no
denying the entertainment value of That Thing You Do!; it's just about
impossible to hate.  It's an inoffensive, enjoyable piece of nostalgia that
is sure to leave audiences smiling and humming, if not singing, "That Thing
You Do!"--quite possibly for days.  To paraphrase a passage from the song:
Though I try and try to forget that song
It is just so hard to do
Every time they play "That Thing You Do!"
