Authors
Burton and Rachel
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     The special effects were okay, but as with past Batman movies, it
was filmed without sufficient light for them to be appreciated (or for
much else to be appreciated at that!).  Most of them were actually
quite poor, the best one is the one in the Adverts--helicopter through
the explosion.   There was tremendous emphasis on the sound effects
during the fight scenes, it was almost like the original TV version
with the POW, and BAM, words written on the screen--they were *that*
noticeable.  The movie was fairly long (two or so hours) and some parts
were VERY slow (I even looked at my watch once!).
     Val Kilmer just didn't work for me as the main man. He didn't have
(or show) enough inner turmoil, the conflict between Bruce and Bat was
really lost. Although my soon-to-be wife like Val better than Michael
Keaton. She thought Keaton spent too much time *morbidly* pondering the
turmoil and hence Val was better (and cuter--go figure).
     Jim Carrey was *superb* as the Riddler, didn't overplay as much as
I was expecting which was refreshing.
     Tommy Lee Jones was well-cast as Two-Face, but also seemed to
lose the split personality this character traditionally had.
     Robin (Chris O'Donnell) was--well--probably unnecessary.  He didn't
do a bad job, I just think the movie wasn't made better with the
character, and wouldn't be worse without it.  My fiancee liked him and
thought the character specifically and significantly contributed to the
plot--and yes, also thinks he's hot.
     Nicole Kidman, the blond love interest, was very good.  She had
guts, personality, good lipstick and good hair--this according to my
blond love interest.  I found her character tawdry and much too
predictable.  Her lines were stilted--not the delivery--the actual
lines.  And yes, she is hot.
     I think it will do well in term of $$, but wont be the summer
SMASH everyone is expecting.  But as with most movies, it is a matter
of expectations going in to see it--mine were high and Im
disappointed.
[My fiancee and I apologize to those easily offended by political 
INcorrectness :-) ]
