Authors
Simon Calloway
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
Cast: Drew Barrymore; Anjelica Huston; Dougray Scott
DVD Widescreen 2.35:1/Trailer/Dolby 5.1/Language Selection
 When I was a kid and my parents brought me to the movies, I saw a film by
Disney called Cinderella.  I never fully understood why kids liked this
particular cartoon.  I found it annoying and boring, even for a cartoon, with
the magic pumpkin and talking mice simply uninteresting. But, I was never a
Disney-type kid.
 Now, when I heard Drew Barrymore would be starring in a live action story of
Cinderella, not produced by Disney, I thought, It could be interesting.  And
Anjelica Huston as the wicked stepmother? I'm there.
 Little did I know, I have found my new favorite movie.  Ever After is an
enchanting, lovely adaptation of the silly Disney cartoon.  It is told through
different versus, such as Cinderella's name being Danielle, and the magic
pumpkin and mice have taken a hike (thank God!).  This is one of the reasons
Ever After works.
 Since you know the story, I will not waste the time to tell it.  I will tell,
however, that the story takes different turns, resulting in very (crowd)
pleasing excitment.  Barrymore is just perfect for the role of Danielle, while
Huston is, of course, chillingly excellent as the evil stepmom.  This is her
film, so to speak.  She steals all her scenes, although Barrymore has a certain
sparkle that makes you want to just watch her and nothing else. 
 Do yourself a favor and see this film.  It will restore your faith in movies.

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
 Ronin is easily the best car-chase film I have ever seen.  It contains scenes
so thrilling, I had to grip my seat til the car came to a crash ending.  The
film reminded my of the 1997-Kurt Russell film Breakdown, in the sense that
both films are breathtaking at filming suspense-filled chase scenes.
 The story of Ronin is rather complicated.  All I can say is that a bunch of
international espionage, ex-KGB, ex- CIA operatives form an elite in Paris to
thwart a briefcase from a power man who is hand-cuffed to it.  What is in the
case, I will not say.  Although, Sam (De Niro) really wants to find out.
 The rest of Ronin contains the group (also including Reno) trying to get the
case from the "unlucky blok" with ways that even James Bond may have looked
negatively at.  But, Ronin looks 100 percent real, compaired to 1997's 007
Tomorrow Never Dies.
 Ronin is a fast-paced, thrilling, expertly-crafted, excellently acted spy film
that put my faith back into action movies (1997's Con Air pretty much destroyed
all of my expectations).

Title
Review for Practical Magic (1998)
 Practical Magic is no masterpiece, but it was one of the more enjoyable movies
of 1998.  I liked the way the story had characters worth caring for, and the
film is essentially a comedy, yet, had touching, dramatic moments.
 Based on the Alice Hoffman novel, the story revolves around the Owen sisters,
Sally (Sandra Bullock) and Gillian (Nicole Kidman).  The are witches in a long
line of Owens, and, like the rest, are cursed.  If they shall find happiness
and love, the curse will strike, as it did for Sally, ending in a fatality.
 For Gillian, the rebel, she is in trouble from her scuze boyfriend.  When she
is kidnapped, along with Sally, and almost maimed, Sally dumps a bunch of Bella
Donna into his drink, and ends up killing him.
 They try to bring him back from the dead using spells, but bring back
something even more sinister.  They bury him in the backyard, and tell no one. 
But, the guy just won't stay down.  He keeps haunting them.
 There is more to Practical Magic, but, it simply wouldn't be such fun if I
told you everything in this funny, magical movie from director Griffin Dunne,
whose credits include the hilarious Addicted to Love (1997).  Bullock and
Kidman have great chemistry, while Dianne Weist and Stockerd Channing both
offer wonderful performances as Sally and Gillian's aunts.  
 Practical Magic won't amount to a lot to the 'serious' film viewer.  Such as,
if you thought the wonderful Ever After or, even, Addicted to Love, were beans,
then Magic is your antimovie.  I loved both of those films, and Magic.  It
casts a spell, so to speak.  Plus, Sandra Bullock could make eating beans
interesting.

Title
Review for Waterboy, The (1998)
Cast: Adam Sandler; Kathy Bates; Henry Winkler; Fairuza Balk
 I have read numerous critical reviews on The Waterboy.  Enough negative ones
to rate this film the worst movie of the year.  Now, in my oppinion, I don't
think it is the worst.   More like the second to worst.
 Yes, everything you've heard about Waterboy is true.  It is an unfunny,
jaw-droppingly stale piece of toast of a comedy, but, what did you expect from
the star of such other bombs as Happy Gilmore and The Wedding Singer. 
(Waterboy was likely dug up from script-reject hell after the success of
Wedding Singer.)
 A huge hit within the male 10-12 category, Waterboy is a fairly simple movie. 
Bobby (Sandler) is a "waterboy"  for a college football team in his hometown. 
He lives with his mother (Bates; does she need work this bad?) in a small cabin
in the middle of a swamp, and is rather physically challanged.  Did I mention
he is, I think it was,  31 years old.
 When the coach (Winkler, never looking more at home) finds out about Bobby's
enormous tackling abilities, he puts Bobby on the team, and they start to win
all their games.
 That's it.  Not much else is circulating in this film, aside the ominous
sexual jokes and Bobby's slurred speech.  While in the theater viewing this
film, I heard laughing I had never heard before.  It was so loud and forced, it
made me wonder if that person was actually getting an hilarious response from
the movie, or if he was just a Sandler fan who felt bad for the actor and felt
he had to laugh at all the jokes, even the unintended ones
 The Waterboy is very juvenile.  Only kids are likely to like this waterlogged
movie, yet they are hardly the right age for Sandler's frank blue humor.  But,
compaired to Happy Gilmore, Waterboy is Lawernce of Arabia.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
Cast: James Woods; Daniel Baldwin; Sheryl Lee
 Vampires is one of the slickest vampire movies to come out of Hollywood is
quite some time.  In fact, I would even go as far to say it is one of the most
entertaining; it ranks right up there behind Interview With the Vampire (1994)
and the original masterpiece, Dracula (1931).
 Not much in the plot department.  Basically the film tells the tale about main
vamp slayer Jack Crow (Woods) and his search for the all-mighty master who is,
also, on a search of his own: To locate a cross that can give him the power to
walk in the sunlight.  In this pic, the vampires aren't scared of crosses,
don't sleep in caskets, don't mind garlic, etc.  I was a little disappointed
about all that stuff.  I like the old fashion sense of when vampires slept in
coffins.
 The amount of gore in this film is surprisingly high.  From the director of
such classics as Halloween (1978) and The Thing (1983), I knew the film would
be violent, yet the level of blood is ominously higher than usual, like
Carpenter was hiding plot holes with carnage, something that he has never done.
 Halloween was actually filmed vise versa, with suspense and atmosphere
frightening instead of gory violence.
 Based on the novel 'Vampire$,' Vampires is a stylishly made, high-octane
thriller, but, undoubtably a little disappointing.  Instead of all that
crimson, maybe Carpenter should have made the master a little like Michael
Myers, all silent, never really seen til the last reel, pounces in sudden
frames.  Overall, Vampires lacks a certain bite, but is nonetheless gruesome
fun.

Title
Review for Urban Legend (1998)
Cast: Alicia Witt; Jared Leto; Rebecca Gayheart; John Nevill; Robert England.
DVD Widescreen 2.35:1/Standard/Making-Of Featurette/Cast Bios/Dolby 5.1
 In the upteenth slasher flick Hollywood has rushed out to the multiplexes
since Scream smashed its way to the top of the box office in 1996, Urban Legend
stands as either malarkey or a camp classic.  I view it as both.
 It opens in the tradition of "the girl gets it" with a women driving alone on
a desolate road in the middle of nowhere, during a thunder storm.  She goes to
a run-down gas station, but is forced to go inside for the creepy attendant
(Brad Dourif) says that her credit card won't work.  When she does what he
says, he attacks her, she escapes, and, bingo, she gets her head chopped off.
 The film then takes us to a small university in Maine, where the local school
newspaper reporter (Leto) claims that the girl was killed based on an urban
legend.  Everyone thinks he is crazy, except for smart Natalie (Witt, who, if
she keeps her cards right, could become a Jamie Lee Curtis of the `90s) who
believes him and is attacked by a stranger wearing a big, bulky coat, hood and
all, carrying an axe!
 After several more attacks and bloody murders, Natalie and reporter Paul try
to find who the killer is and which urban legend he will use next.
 Urban Legend reminded me of Scream many times, but not in the sense that
Legend is a blunt rip-off, but in small details:  The big frat house party that
takes place at the end of the movie; the leading lady being the prime target of
the psycho;  the scene where a girl is being chased inside a radio station,
which feature enormous sound-proof windows (Scream 2) for the killer to
surprise her.
 Legend isn't fresh in the brains department, but, lo, it is a lot of fun. 
It's stylishly directed by newcomer Jamie Blanks and is probably the best
horror film featuring a masked maniac since the Scream movies and Halloween:
H20.  We can safely pass on Disturbing Behavior and Bride of Chucky.
 The killer's identity is very hard to figure out, and when you think you know,
you really don't.  I was disappointed with the revealing of the murderer and
the cause for the campus slaughter, yet, the actor/actress makes such fun of
the role the thin plotline sort of creeps away from you.
 Urban Legend isn't great, but the amount of sustained scares and the way the
film is shot, it isn't the worst way to spend two hours.  But, for a real treat
in college carnage, rent Scream 2.

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
 Recently, I saw Nicolas Cage in City of Angels and Snake Eyes.  Now, neither
were great films, but Cage supplied two excellent performances in them.  So, I
went back and took a look at Cage's other films, most notably I saw The Rock
(again; I forget he is in that), and Con Air, both produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer.
 The Rock wasn't good.  I didn't like the mindless action scenes and
incoherency of the screenplay.  Now, Con Air is even worse.  A plethora of over
the top action sequences and ugly acting by Cage and such other wonderful
actors as Ving Rhames and John Malkovitch.
 Cage plays military man Cameron Poe.  When he accidentally kills a thug who
harrasses his wife, he is sent to prison for seven years.  His sentence is up,
so he, along with many other convicts, ride home in Con Air, a plane made
especially for rapists, killers, kidnappers, etc.  All these grease balls make
for some predictable mayham.
 A prisoner escapes him clutches, kills the pilots, and fly the plane to
Arizona.  All this makes for a mindnumbing blurr or a film.
Case No. 1: How did the con escape?  The film never fully explains.
Case No. 2: There just happens to be a con on board who knows how to fly.
Case No. 3: There happens to be a female security guard on the plane.  A
perfect match for the rapist who needs to have sex even during a plane crash.
 Con Air pretty much destroys all expectations of action films.  It is the
anti-Spielberg.

Title
Review for In Dreams (1999)
Cast: Annette Bening; Stephen Rea; Robert Downey, Jr.; Adain Quinn
 In Dreams is part X-Files, part horror movie, but always interesting.  It's
the kind of movie where you think you know what is going to happen, and, bang! 
The plot twists yet again.
 The film stars Bening as Caire Cooper, a young women who is happily married
and has a daughter who appears in school plays.  They live in a happy little
town in New England.  The town is so quaint, the school play of Snow White is
shown outside, with Prince Charming riding a real horse.
 During this unfaithful show, Claire's daughter mysteriously disappears among
all the kids and parents.  There is a kidnapper out there, and Claire nows
where he is. She begins to pick up psychic day dreams of a little girl in an
apple orchard, a boy tapped in a room the is filling with water, a town
underwater.  These are some pretty horrible images, and Claire can't handle
them, especially now that her child has been taken away from her.
 The story soon has Claire in a hospital and with a psychiatrist (Rea).  She
tells him that the man who took her  daughter is sending her these weird
thoughts and he has also taken other children in the town.  This man is Downey
Jr., and he can play a weirdo at heart.
 In Dreams was directed by Neil Jordan. You can feel the sort of Interview With
the Vampire-esque filming technics he uses.  Atmosphere, suspense is all used
instead of blood and other bodily fluids as most horror films do.  And with
very good acting from Bening, In Dreams succeeds, to a point.  Aside from what
the film has going for it, Dreams sometimes trys too hard at making bizarreness
apparant.  When the kidnapper starts talking to Claire via a computer, the film
relishes X-Files territory, and I liked it.  When Claire literally goes mad and
starts throwing apples into the sank and smashing them while the camera follows
her every movement in dizzying essense, I just thought You don't need to do
that, the film was going smoothly just as a talky thriller.
 In Dreams is a nice, stylish, sometimes scary film, but, it could have used
that "X''-tra something.
