Authors
I.D. Letterman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
The salt of the earth, the true guardians of our values are not the
superheroes nor the high profile super-achievers  but the rank and file
working stiffs, the ordinary citizens. Out of their weakness and their
failures they muster enough strength to rise to the challenge when the chips
are down, somehow making a virtue of their  weakness and extracting strength
from their commonplace attributes. Mystery Men is about ordinary people who
challenge themselves to heroic action: the blue collar worker with his
shovel, every man who ever used a fork, every citizen who was ever enraged,
everyone who farts, and every woman that was ever advised and tyranized by
her father at a bowling alley. The parable of the Invisible Boy works at
several  levels. There are the neglected children that no one sees because
no one bothers to look. At a different level there is the anonymity that
strips man of his identity in the mechanized society and at a more
superficial level there is the man that longs to be special but in reality
is like everybody else. And then there is the set of simple maxims, the
cliched standards of idealism that inspire the common man to give his best,
represented by a hilarious character called `The Sphinx.'
In the opening sequence of Mystery Men we see a band of thugs raiding a
group of helpless citizens, and a trio of ridiculous would be superheroes
who come to the rescue attempting to foil the attack, only to be humiliated
not just by superior force but by their own ineptness. While one attacks
with a shovel, sometimes banging his own teammates, another throws forks at
the crooks. Out of context as they have to be at the beginning of the movie,
these gags are not particularly funny and you brace yourself for another of
those presentations in which hectic tries to be funny and fails. But as the
movie unfolds and you get to understand the characters, you begin to
identify with their ineptness and their indomitable idealism. When the
situation repeats itself in a different variation; an attack on the villain'
s limousine, the effect is very funny indeed. Knowing that his rage is
Captain Furious' only weapon you understand his frenzied but alas
ineffective attack with fists, elbows, knees and feet on the roof of the car
and you roll with laughter as he maniacally wrestles the hood ornament. The
shovel attack and the fork missiles are now thoroughly enjoyable. If one had
known then what one knows now one would have laughed heartily at the opening
sequence, which is not to fault the script because there was no other way in
which the characters could have been introduced.
This movie has a strong cast and many funny sequences. I have not attempted
to present a technical analysis. Simply to communicate that it is a
thoroughly enjoyable fable about the common man laughing at his own
limitations and delusions, while celebrating his own worth. In a strange way
it is a little like The Sixth Sense, in that knowing the premise is
essential to the integration and enjoyment of the whole., but unlike the
Sixth Sense, knowing the premise in advance can only enhance the enjoyment
of Mystery Men.
