Authors
Long Che Chan
Number of Reviews
29

Title
Review for Full Metal Jacket (1987)
The fact that Full Metal Jacket, Stanley Kubrick's Vietnam War movie,
was filmed entirely on soundstages in England has been advertised by
many critics as if it were a quality of the film.  It certainly is a
different way of working out locations.  Full Metal Jacket abandons the
Oliver Stone war epic and opts for a clumsy string of Nam vignettes.
Sadly, unique approaches cannot salvage a dead movie, which is what I
think Full Metal Jacket is.  Labeled the cinema's "master" by countless
film fans, historians, and filmmakers, Stanley Kubrick has made a few
masterpieces: 2001: A Space Odyssey, his galactic opera, and Dr.
Strangelove, his festival of Cold War caricatures.  These films were
brilliant because they discussed things that were valuable or poked fun
at certain issues in frightening ways.  Full Metal Jacket has been
hailed in many arenas as the definitive war film which surprises me
because the movie, a two-part epic wanna-be, and its isolated anecdotes,
though slightly amusing, are either war clichés or seemingly fabricated
horror shows of hilarity.  Is this what the Vietnam War was about?
Full Metal Jacket (the title refers to ammunition) seems to house two
short films.  Both have the film's central hero, a private nicknamed
Joker (Matthew Modine), but they seem unrelated.  The first segment of
the film depicts the horrors of basic training.  Several marine recruits
are at the South Carolina bootcamp which is dominated by the instructor
from hell, Sgt. Hartman (Lee Ermey).  He verbally and physically abuses
the men (he calls them "ladies" and "maggots"), shooting insanely rude
remarks like bullets, violating them, and forcing them to violate
themselves and their beliefs.  Hartman finds a pet victim in a heavy
klutz named Leonard or, as he is renamed, Gomer Pyle (Vincent
D'Onofrio).   While the film's focal point, Pvt. Joker, struggles to
help Pyle in this netherworld, the entire camp gets punished for every
frequent mistake Pyle makes.
This boot camp segment is nothing more than a march of characters as
empty of humanity as the caricatures in Strangelove.  Kubrick keeps
shoving his theme of dehumanization down our throats throughout the film
but, with dehumanization, there must be humanity first and this film's
characters are not of flesh and blood but are 2-D and, as far as I'm
concerned, are corpses.  If we are supposed to sympathize with these men
who are quickly being molded and brainwashed into becoming killing
machines, we must know and witness that they have human qualities that
are worth saving from this corruption.  The strange thing is that all
the time America thought it was going to help Vietnam purge itself of
Communism, it was contaminating its own people by replacing their souls
with robotic, murderous ones.
People say that Lee Ermey and Vincent D'Onofrio give searing
performances.  If they are supposed to show any range of emotion, they
have not done so.  Ermey's and D'Onofrio's may be the most interesting
characters in the entire movie, and the two play their monotone roles
with relative force, but there is nothing here but clown acts.  There is
not one streak of life in any of these characters, which is both
yawn-inducing and may mislead some to think this film is
thought-provoking stuff.  The first segment is a cartoon with that
sinister look of murder borrowed from Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange.  It
is bitterly hilarious, but with little to say on the effects of war or
dehumanization.
The film's second segment cannot claim to be as entertaining.  At least
the first part of Full Metal Jacket was absorbing and we got a sense of
what the director was hinting at.  In the second portion, everything
falls apart.  Even the few building blocks on violence and terror that
the first part provided dissolve under the sheer lack of direction of
the film's message.  We meet up again with Pvt. Joker who is now a
journalist for the magazine Stars & Stripes.  He follows a platoon to
get their insights and becomes an unwilling part of a cat-and-mouse
showdown between a Vietnamese sniper and the quickly dying men in the
group.
There are some interesting scenes in this segment: one in which a
television crew slowly pans across soldier-infested grounds.  This scene
serves no purpose.  Another scene has the same crew interviewing men at
war.  The men are self-conscious in front of the camera and talk about
their ideas on Vietnam and the war they're fighting.  That scene too has
no purpose.
It is especially discouraging that the film's hero, Pvt. Joker, is
without motivation, evident interest, or insights into the war.  He just
seems to be a piece of garbage floating around in the wind.  All the
characters seem this way.  Full Metal Jacket is clueless: the Vietnamese
population is represented by two prostitutes who come around as easily
bought items for American soldiers.  The men bargain with the hookers'
managers and the prostitutes satisfy their low-paying customers.  The
only other significant Vietnamese character is the female sniper in the
climactic scene.  She is shot and Pvt. Joker must choose whether he
wants to put her out of her misery or let her lie there to rot.  She
yelps, "Shoot me" endlessly in this rather painful scene.
Kubrick's vision of Vietnam is a world of sameness.  I do not mock
Kubrick's desire to film Jacket on British soundstages for location is
of little importance with a good movie and a good production designer
waiting in the wings, but the film has a gross artificial aura.  We see
the same environment throughout the second half of the movie: the
imported palm trees, the constructed ruined buildings.  Kubrick has a
lack of vision for Full Metal Jacket, both visually and, worst of all,
thematically.  The director is a man of great passion for films and we
know he tried on this film.  However, rather than having the truth of
the stupidity of war float to the surface, he lets all truth sink to the
bottom.
There is nothing new to be learned from this movie.  The first segment
shifts to the next with such disregard for continuity that you're
positive the second part belongs to a totally different film.  People
will say that Kubrick leaves Full Metal Jacket open for discussion and
one's own opinions, but there is nothing here upon which to base
opinions.  Some of the movie is enjoyable but, as a moralistic tale,
Full Metal Jacket is unique, but puny and primitive.

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
Middle school is the beginning of academic hell for young people.  It is
a difficult experience with other kids verbally maiming other kids
because they are different.  It isn't fun.  However, my middle school
experiences were never as horrific as those of the suburban jeer-target
seventh-grade girl shown here, Dawn "Wiener Dog" Wiener.  Played by
Heather Matarazzo in a near-flawless performance, Dawn is a misfit, an
outcast.  She is the butt of countless jokes because she is, to put it
as simply as one of Dawn's classmates did, "ugly."  She isn't ugly, but
she looks different and that is what spawns the mockery and violence in
this school.  Dawn is disliked/hated by nearly everyone except her
timid, small male friend who is the only other member of her Special
People Club.
The film begins with Dawn trying to find a lunch table to sit at (poor
girl).  She finally ends up at the table occupied by a scruffy-looking
girl who later joins a group of girls who begin to banter Dawn, calling
her a "Lesbo".  Her teachers are no more understanding.  During a test,
a boy sitting next to her named Brandon continually bothers her by
mouthing obscenities.  She raises her hand to get him to stop and the
unjust result is that both of them have after-school detentions.
Whenever Dawn tries to do right, she ends up ruining her life more.
There is a scene at a school assembly where she is the target of an
endless stream of spitballs.  The two boys behind her are performing
this well-known middle school ritual and she plans to keep quiet and
ignore.  She soon busts, as anyone would, and plans to hit them with
spitballs, too.  She ends up hitting a teacher in the eye, resulting in
her near-expulsion and the teacher nearly becoming blind.
Her parents are the pinnacle of movie-parent scum.  They claim to they
love all their children equally but that's basically a load of crap.
Here is a list of their children, in order of how much they love them:
1) Missy, a hopelessly awful young ballerina, 2) Mark, a nerdy teenager
whose only goal is to enrich his college resume, and 3) the loathsome,
unloved Dawn, who refuses to take down her Special People Club House to
make room for her parent's twentieth anniversary in the back yard.  Mark
has formed a garage band (to further adorn his college resume) with the
most popular hunk in high school, a long-haired dude named Steve.  Dawn
immediately falls head-over-heels in love/infatuated with him and plans
to weave a web of niceness towards him to capture him, seduce him.  She
finally gets him alone in her house and fills him up with junk food to
please him.  He is indifferent.  She holds religious prayers in her
bedroom in which she speaks to Steve's ID card (which she stole) in
front of a fire and whispers and chants "You will love me!"
Back at the dreaded inferno of a school, the scruffy girl we saw in the
first scene tells Dawn to leave her man alone- Brandon is hers!!!  The
truth is that Dawn was never pursuing Brandon.  Later, Brandon sets a
date with Dawn to "rape" her and tells her to "BE THERE" and it is
hilarious when she actually turns up to get "raped".  Both of them, I
think, have no knowledge of what the word "rape" actually means so
nothing like that really happens, just mindless smooching.  Turns out,
Brandon and Dawn are falling in love.  And the sparks fly.
Welcome to the Dollhouse has a wonderful, fresh comedy that coats the
infuriating drama of Dawn's middle-school voyage.  This is the perfect
antonym for TV shows and movies that depict middle school as a child's
haven.  Dawn, as Roger Ebert said, will hopefully become famous and
successful and those she was hurt by will be a part of society's
lower-class.  I enjoyed this film because of its honesty (maybe the
horrors of middle school were a bit too dramatized) but I loved it for
its comedy - its satirical derision of all those kids you just hate in
middle school, those kids who hated you.  Here's to the memories of
those years of pre-adolescent suffering.

Title
Review for Streetcar Named Desire, A (1951)
For screen adaptations of theater, there's always a notion that the
movie is simply a filmed play.  I have read a couple of the great
Tennessee Williams' plays and A Streetcar Named Desire is very similar
to the movie version.  The film, starring Vivien Leigh, Marlon Brando,
Kim Hunter, and Karl Malden in performances that have become touchstones
for powerful acting, is one of my favorite films of all-time and I,
naively, say that watching the film probably has its advantages over
watching the play version and vice versa.  With film there is a more
intimate feel what with close-ups and the ability to be a complete
perfectionist.  With theater you are able to see the play (and what a
play it is!) in all its glory with the spontaneity that theater allows.
I have never seen a stage production of Streetcar which, alongside the
work of Arthur Miller, must be the greatest American play written this
century.  Therefore, I cannot really judge if the movie is just a filmed
play.  However, regardless of ideas and opinions brought about by
nit-picking, A Streetcar Named Desire is one of the most powerful and
frightening films I've ever seen and, I am convinced, is a milestone in
the careers of every person involved.
The film version was directed by the incomparable Elia Kazan who also
directed the New York version of the play.  Most of the cast of the New
York stage version went on to star in the film except for Jessica
Tandy.  She was replaced by Vivien Leigh as Blanche DuBois, the famous
character that has been used ever since it was written as a test of an
actress' talent.  The film begins as Blanche searches for her sister,
Stella Kowalski's (Kim Hunter), house after having traveled from her
home in Laurel, Mississippi to New Orleans.  She is tired, worn.  She
discovers Stella in living conditions that appall her.  The home is a
two bedroom apartment and Stella shares it with her husband, Stanley
(Marlon Brando).
Throughout the film we see the tragic deterioration of Blanche.  When
she arrives in New Orleans on the streetcar Desire, she is already an
unstable, neurotic woman.  She frantically explains to her pregnant
sister that the family plantation back in Laurel, Belle Reve, was lost.
Stanley's suspicions (which he tries to justify by explaining New
Orleans' napoleonic code in which what belongs to the wife also belongs
to the husband) about Blanche push her to a mental breakdown.  After
much investigation, Stanley discovers that Blanche was forced out of
Laurel for having an affair with a student at her school and that she
brought her sexual "victims" to an infamous hotel named the Tarantula
Arms.
Blanche describes Stanley as common.  He is a violent, merciless
character who only aids in crumbling the self-esteem and sanity of
Blanche.  In one of the most famous scenes in history, Stella, after
being in a violent fight with Stanley, lustfully returns to him against
the advice of Blanche and friends.  "Hey, Stella!" Stanley screams.  He
is an animal with little remorse for his wrong-doing.
When Blanche has seemingly found love with Stanley's poker buddy Mitch
(Karl Malden), Stanley seems determined to keep the two apart, divulging
horrific information to Mitch incriminating Blanche and her murky past.
The romance is tested to the breaking point and so is Blanche who, by
the endless and brutal manipulation of Stanley, is becoming more and
more disillusioned and sick everyday.
We also learn about a mysterious deceased husband of Blanche whom she
claims she killed with her disapproval of him.  The play alludes to the
fact that Blanche's husband was gay and that she was a nymphomaniac, but
the movie never even skims the surface of such allusions.  This is
because of the constraints built by the Legion of Decency who censored
Streetcar before its release.  Despite the meddling of this awful
organization, Streetcar is chilling and potent.  Elia Kazan
intelligently interprets Tennessee Williams' screenplay and works to
bring out the best in all those involved with the movie even with the
barriers the Legion thrust upon Hollywood films in the 50s.
Vivien Leigh's portrayal of the legendary Blanche DuBois is captivating
and stunning and has become one of the great female motion picture
performances of all time.  Likewise, Marlon Brando's fierce performance
as Stanley Kowalski has become one of the most admired pieces of film
acting ever.  Kim Hunter and Karl Malden's performances have not,
despite much praise, gotten the overwhelming attention Leigh and Brando
have gotten.  I think Hunter's performance as the lust-ridden Stella
Kowalski is one of the best supporting performances I have ever seen and
Karl Malden is, as always, perfection.  With A Streetcar Named Desire,
Hollywood entered a new realm of acting, a world of method acting that
brought more to the portrayed characters, thereby improving the film.
A Streetcar Named Desire has remained undated and painfully emotional,
even with the decades that have gone by and the Legion's mutilation.  It
is about the disintegration of the human spirit and of humanity itself.
Blanche never loses her humanity but her spirit is trampled on again and
again. Stanley is one of the most monstrous creatures I've seen on film;
he has no humanity.  The story tells of lust (Blanche's seeming sexual
lust and her lust for anything but the pain of realism; Stella's pursuit
of a life away from the barbaric Stanley which is marred by her unending
lust for him), violence, inhumanity, and complete darkness and sadness.
"I don't want realism, I want magic," Blanche cries after a violent
encounter with Mitch.  This scream basically sums up what everyone seems
to be looking for: magic.  Reality is not always pretty.  Regardless of
whether the play or movie version is better, A Streetcar Named Desire
has become one of the most compelling stories of cinema.  I watched
Blanche DuBois for the sixth time last night as she rapidly dissolved in
a world of her own pretentious magic, her shield, and I was, again,
shattered.

Title
Review for Wizard of Oz, The (1939)
A
How to begin a review of one of the most famous films of all time?  The
Wizard of Oz has become so beloved it is embraced by a legendary,
mythical aura that few films have (Casablanca and Gone With the Wind
have such an aura with the public; Citizen Kane has the same aura with
critics.)  Every one of its 101 minutes in duration has become
synonymous to great Hollywood.  Several scenes are unforgettable: the
famous scene in which Dorothy croons "Over the Rainbow" in a sepia-toned
Kansas; the moment when at last the film's fivesome (don't forget,
there's Toto too!) reach the Emerald City, one of the most famous
locations in the world of movies; and the sight of the almost villainous
Wizard and his facade hidden behind erupting flames.  Who will ever
forget the moment when Dorothy opens the door of her uprooted house,
exits, and steps into a world of color, over the rainbow?  Not only is
that scene celebrated, it's magical.  The Wizard of Oz is about the
journey of our beloved heroine, Dorothy Gale (Judy Garland), and her
dear friends as they follow the Yellow Brick Road in hopes of fulfilling
their dreams.
In The Wizard of Oz, a screen adaptation of the equally enthralling L.
Frank Baum book, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, Dorothy represents our
weariness, our boredom with routines and life in general.  She dreams of
some glorious place away from her farm house with her Uncle Henry,
Auntie Em, and hired helpers Hunk (Ray Bolger), Zeke (Bert Lahr), and
Hickory (Jack Haley).  She is sick of the town hag Miss Gulch (Margaret
Hamilton), who tries to take her dog, Toto, away from her.  Everything
is dull and she longs for liveliness, as any young person would.
During the memorable cyclone sequence, Dorothy's Kansas is hit by a
twister and, stranded alone in her house, she is hit by a window and
falls into a deep sleep.  In her dream, she is in a place called Oz
where she has miraculously killed the Wicked Witch of the East, is loved
by thousands of munchkins, is sought after by the murdered witch's
sister of the West, and is given two ruby slippers by Glinda, the Good
Witch of the North (Billie Burke).  Despite her beautiful surroundings
(Oz is one of movie history's most fascinating, beautiful, and sacred
places), Dorothy longs for Kansas.  Glinda tells her that the only way
she can get back is to visit the mysterious Wizard of Oz.  She must
follow the Yellow Brick Road.
On her way to the Wizard's Emerald City, she meets three friends: the
Scarecrow who longs for a brain, the Tin Man who longs for a heart, and
the Cowardly Lion who longs for bravery.  Together, these three men,
Toto, and Dorothy make a great team and together they suffer obstacles
and the hateful intent of the Wicked Witch of the West, a frightening
woman with hideous seaweed-green skin and an unflattering black outfit.
When they get to Oz, our five friends realize that the Wizard is only a
"man behind a curtain," a strange Kansas-native who became lost in Oz
and was named its enigmatic ruler by the people.  He teaches the
Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Lion that the things they desire from
him have always been within them and are quiet qualities waiting to be
unleashed and realized.  The Scarecrow is intelligent, the Tin Man is
affectionate, and the Lion is courageous.  We, the audience, have
realized this all along but it enlightens us to see these characters',
our companions, dreams come true.  However, Dorothy's future remains
uncertain until Glinda arrives and informs her that home, too, is within
her.  Then, she taps her heels three times and chants "There's no place
like home"
The actors in the sepia-toned Kansas portion of The Wizard of Oz are
featured in the colored Oz section in more exciting, outrageous ways.
Ray Bolger, who plays Hunk in the Kansas part, is seen as the Scarecrow
in Oz.  Jack Haley plays Hickory and the sweet Tin Man.  Bert Lahr plays
Zeke in Kansas and then is transformed into the hilarious Cowardly Lion
in Oz.  Margaret Hamilton is the amazing villain of the movie and plays
the heartless Miss Gulch and the Wicked Witch of the West.  In Oz, the
characters are how Dorothy pictures her Kansas friends would be over the
rainbow.
Like many movie classics, The Wizard of Oz underwent its share of pain.
During the shooting of the film, many directors added their own touch of
brilliance: Richard Thorpe, George Cukor, King Vidor, and Victor
Fleming, the credited director of Oz who, that same year, became the
credited director of the many directors of Gone With the Wind.  There
was also trouble with the cast: first, Shirley Temple was coveted for
the role of Dorothy Gale and Gale Sondergaard was considered for the
role of Miss Gulch and the Wicked Witch, a character that was being
shaped into a glamorous villain due to the huge success of Snow White
and the Seven Dwarfs' Wicked Queen.  Perhaps the greatest calamities for
the actors were those of Margaret Hamilton and Buddy Ebsen.  The
near-fatal illness and replacement of Ebsen, who was the original Tin
Man, was spawned by the use of toxic metal make-up.  Hamilton's skin was
charred while doing the scene in which the Wicked Witch threatens
Dorothy and disappears in an explosion of fire and colored smoke.
Over the years, The Wizard of Oz has become the ultimate family film and
a favorite of the young at heart.  It is a movie of splendor and
grandness.  The newly-released DVD of the restored version of the film
is one of the best DVDs I've encountered yet.  Not only is The Wizard of
Oz restored to its original, colorful glory, but there are  hours upon
hours worth of features and goodies that are necessary for any Oz fan.
There are several theatrical trailers, behind-the-scenes snippets and
outtakes, publicity shots, a documentary hosted by Angela Lansbury, a
"jukebox" with nearly twenty tracks of The Wizard of Oz music
recordings, and several other treats.
The Wizard of Oz has become a classic not only because of the mythic
hardship the cast and crew faced during shooting, not only because of
Judy Garland's amazing delivery of each line and song, not only because
of Bert Lahr's priceless humor, Ray Bolger's gymnastics, or Jack Haley's
tenderness, but also because of the lessons it teaches while still being
enormously entertaining and enlightening.  The Wizard of Oz reminds us
that, though we may not live somewhere over the rainbow, there is, after
all, no place like home.

Title
Review for Hannah and Her Sisters (1986)
I don't know why I like Woody Allen's films so much.  He, like myself,
admires Ingmar Bergman's films and his movies have a sort of wonderful
way of making you feel giddy.  Most of them are funny.  Hannah and Her
Sisters has its big laughs, but its primary purpose isn't to get giggles
out of you, but to elaborate on a moral that is told, loosely or
obviously, in most every Allen movie I've seen- life will fall into
place, the outsider will one day be an insider.  There is a Tolstoy
quotation mentioned in the film in which the author states that "life is
meaningless." It seems to me that this movie is trying to prove Tolstoy
wrong.
Perhaps Allen was aspiring to more Bergmanesque heights when he adopted
three sisters as his main characters for this film.  Hannah and Her
Sisters is a skillful and fun study of these three women and their
relationships with each other, their parents, and the men in their
life.  These three sisters belong to a successful show business clan and
Allen uses their annual Thanksgiving dinners as the link between each
other.   It's a very hopeful and perky movie, beginning and ending with
Thanksgiving dinners, each marking significant turning points in the
characters' lives.
The sisters are a suffering bunch- not as miserable and sullen as the
threesome in Cries and Whispers, but very much weary of life, people,
and sometimes, of each other.  Hannah (Mia Farrow) is the "head" sister,
the woman "in control" of her life, who is generous, understanding, and
nearly perfect.  However, she is so full of her charity, she forgets
herself.  She says she has needs, but one of the film's minor flaws is
that she never expresses them.  Throughout the movie she is a tame
earth-mother who never seems to needs anything.  Lee (Barbara Hershey)
is a vibrant, young woman who is trapped in a cage constructed by her
and her also-caged boyfriend (Max von Sydow), a pitiful man who
"teaches" her about art, mocking people's enjoyment of pop culture.  She
just so happens to share romantic feelings for Hannah's second husband
Elliot (Michael Caine), a sweet, confused financial-consultant.  The
third sister is Holly (Dianne Wiest), a mess of a lady who has a
terrible cocaine addiction, an impotent career as an actress, and no one
who loves her.  Within the span of two years their lives will change,
will weave in and out, go from turmoil to bliss.
Woody Allen has a character, a neurotic hypochondriac named Mickey
Sachs, the ex-husband of Hannah.  I think he's the most important
character in the film- he is the one who, in the end, realizes life is
not meaningless, that it's a ride, and it is on this note the film
ends.  Maybe surrounding the whole movie around himself was a scheme of
vanity on Woody Allen's part, but the movie wouldn't work without his
hilarious and ridiculous cynicism and, later, his change of heart.
Mickey Sachs is the outsider of the family, an outsider trying to belong
somewhere, and in the end, he finds his way into the clan.  This is a
man who is like all of Allen's other characters he has written for
himself, an erratic shrimp drowning in his own neurosis, a man trying to
find the meaning of life.  Throughout the beginning of Hannah, Mickey
obsessively worries over a possible brain tumor causing his ear
infection.  He wakes up in the middle of the night screaming like a
lunatic.  When he discovers he is out of danger's way, he concludes that
life is meaningless and goes on a quest for a religious belief to
brighten up his existence.  Woody Allen never strays from his usual
topics- religion, art, death, life, love- and here, he seems to have
come to a point where he has found the answer- there is no answer.
Life's meaning is that there is no meaning.  We are here for the ride
and those who are ceaselessly plagued by pointless matters like death
are squandering their time on Earth.
The decisive point of the movie for the sisters, as a group, (spoilers
ahead) is a scene in a restaurant- Holly has been disappointed yet again
with an audition failure and is, once again, asking for Hannah's money
so she can pursue writing; Lee has had her fling with Elliot and it's
getting much too complicated for her; and Hannah is exasperated with
Holly's unsettling insecurity.  As the camera circles endlessly around
the table, a wellspring of emotion pours out of the actors and begins to
finalize their characters' suffering, or at least make it evident to
each other.
The definitive point for Mickey Sachs is (more spoilers) a screening of
the Marx Brothers' Duck Soup and as the lunacy of the movie begins to
engage Mickey, he realizes, finally, what he has been searching for.
The whole plot is tied up very nicely at the end.  The way the movie is
structured is wonderfully different from any other previous Allen film-
each new chapter of the movie is introduced with a title card showing a
quotation (like the Tolstoy one), or a character's current thoughts.  It
is a brilliant style that doesn't draw attention to itself, unlike the
remarkably ingenious construction of Annie Hall did.  The movie is very
light and fluid and thoroughly enjoyable because it's smart.  By the
way, it was also made the year I was born, and I hate the fact that the
Academy's Best Picture award that year went to Platoon, a bloody war
film, instead of a feel-good comedy-drama like this.  The script is less
of a dissection and more of a contemplation.  I don't think it's Allen's
best (Annie Hall holds a dear place in my heart), but it's certainly his
most complete.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars, Episode I  The Phantom Menace
directed by George Lucas
starring Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Jake Lloyd, Natalie Portman, Samuel
L. Jackson, Frank Oz
Rated PG (sci-fi action and violence)
I wish I could say that there is something more to the new Star Wars
installment than what you see in the commercials, but there isn't.
George Lucas is an expert at crafting triumphant, special effects-bound
flicks and he has done it again.  This is the first Star Wars film I've
seen on the big screen, so, of course, the impact was much greater than
when I watched the three original episodes on video.  What is compelling
about The Phantom Menace is not its disposable story, but its amazing
visuals.
Basically, the film's plot is centered around trade disputes between two
planets.  Qui-Gon (Liam Neeson) and his young apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi
(Ewan McGregor) set out with the animated Jar-Jar Binks to fix the mess
that may result in war. When their ship breaks down and they are
stranded, they find a young boy, Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) and his
slave mother.  Qui-Gon strongly believes that Anakin is destined for
Jedi greatness and immediately takes him under his wing.  Anakin
participates in a heart-pounding Podrace, one of the highlights of the
film, to get the equipment needed to fix Qui-Gon's ship. However, most
everyone is doubtful about entrusting the future to some unknown slave
boy.  Meanwhile, Queen Amadala (Natalie Portman) is frustrated and at
wit's end, being naďve and young and having so much responsibility on
her shoulders.
There are hardly any emotional scenes in the film- even when we discover
that Anakin will be leaving his slave mother behind to begin Jedi
training, the frenzied excitement of the whole film wears down the
poignancy to the size of a crumb.  This does not prove that The Phantom
Menace is poorly made for it is brilliantly made.  In all the Star Wars
films, human emotions that we, the audience, can identify with are
usually nil, but the films are for pure enjoyment, not for uplifting
purposes.  Despite the fun of watching the movie, The Phantom Menace is
not without flaws.  For starters, we have the ill-conceived, moronic
character Jar-Jar Binks who should be considered a threat to Star Wars
galactic society and to the audience.  What a klutz!  George Lucas
clumsily tried to create a fun character that would be as memorable as,
say, Yoda, R2-D2, or C3-PO, but, alas, his efforts were in vain.
Secondly (this may be good or bad, depending on your point of view), the
movie's atmosphere is so different from the familiar comic-book feel of
the previous three Star Wars installments.  This is due, perhaps, to the
utter complexity to this movie's plot and the higher level of
sophistication of the visual effects used here.  The movie seems to be
reaching for epic proportions.
I can't say much about the acting, though acting has never been what you
saw Star Wars movies for anyway.  However, there is absolutely no
pizzazz to the performances- they are straightforward and, at times,
stale.  Natalie Portman has a great presence, but her turn as Queen
Amadala makes the queen a stoic, unfeeling enigma.  There is nothing we
can hold onto in her performance to make us believe the trade
predicament is anything of importance.  Jake Lloyd is the only actor
here who has an ounce of evident spunk.
Despite the inevitable faults, there is so much to enjoy about the
movie.  The heightened excitement of the final sequences doesn't quite
surpass the famous The Empire Strikes Back climactic scenes, but they
are amazing and edge-of-your-seat fun in their own rite.  The film is a
treasure to look at.  The visual effects are astonishing 99.8% of the
time- the awe-inspiring, mouth-opening, eye-popping sight of the
underwater city is nothing short of production design and special
effects genius.  Not since 1997's The Fifth Element has there been a
film as drenched in visual treats as this one.  The production design is
reminiscent of The Fifth Element, the previous Star Wars movies,
Kubrick's 2001, maybe even of Fritz Lang's classic silent Metropolis.
However, all the sets are so original.  The original Star Wars movies
can't even match the grandeur of this film's visuals and that is a sheer
pleasure for the viewer- it gives us hope of even greater things for the
upcoming episode.
The costumes are remarkable and have Jean-Paul Gaultier written all over
them.  Whether its Queen Amadala's gigantic wardrobe complete with
gold-embroidery and feathers, or the Jedis' simple brown uniforms, the
costume designer has fused talent with outrageousness.  The costumes are
one of the true delights of watching the movie.
As for John Williams' score, I don't think he's done one as complex or
powerful since I can't even remember.  It is as epic as his Schindler's
List score and as thrilling and zestful as Jaws.  It includes the bare
bones of his music from the previous three films, but Williams has added
on, made the music much more intense and moving.
What with the overwhelming hoopla that circled this movie, one might
come in with high expectations and be disappointed.  There is very
little to hate in the film: it's a very accomplished and skillfully made
flick.  It is the best "fun" film and the best big-budget film out
today, most definitely.

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
Le Violon Rouge (The Red Violin)
directed by Francois Girard
starring Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Christopher Koncz, Jason Flemyng
Not Rated (some sexuality)
Why do people buy antiques?  They're old and frayed materials that have
passed through time, faded by each passing year.  We pay gigantic sums
of money to obtain them, receiving what can easily be called
disposable.  In The Red Violin, an auction is being held and many people
ferociously covet a centuries-old violin; one that has been restored,
but nevertheless, is worn.  They all desire this relic for different
reasons.  They know something about it.  It has been touched by history,
by their ancestors, by those they profoundly admire.  Francois Girard's
flawed but pleasing film, The Red Violin, discusses this and more- the
yearning for "perfection," as Roger Ebert pointed out; and the need and
importance of music and an emotional outlet.
The film follows the journey of this red violin, from its native Italy
to when it resides in Communist China.  The violin's odyssey begins in
Italy, where a pregnant woman, Anna Bussotti, has just discovered from
her fortune-telling servant that she will have a difficult, possibly
fatal, childbirth.  Her husband, Nicolo, a man who makes violins for a
living, has made a beautiful one for his coming baby.  When Anna dies
from labor difficulties and the baby dies too, Nicolo bathes this
priceless violin in her blood.  It is then shipped to an Austrian
monastery.  For a century, it is used for teaching little boys how to
play, until finally it comes into the hands of a very young musician, a
boy, Kasper Weiss,  who is possibly as precocious as Mozart was.  He is
nurtured by Georges Poussin, who auditions him in front of royalty.
>From there, the violin comes into the hands of gypsies in England and
then to a famous, genius musician, Frederick Pope, who is inspired by
the violin's utter perfection to begin playing it again.  He woos his
women and makes love to them with this instrument.  The red violin turns
up, later, in China during the Cultural Revolution, where a woman must
hide it from Western-hating officials.  Its final stop is at the home of
the auction, Canada, where it is discovered after being much sought
after, and is restored and about to be sold.
All the people who gather at the auction to purchase this artifact are
aware of its importance, that it has journeyed several continents and
countries and has been in the hands of such famous and prodigious people
as Frederick Pope.  A pair of Chinese people are after it because of its
history in China; one man longs for it because it has been used by
Pope.  So much emotion has been poured into and been released through
this instrument, "the perfect marriage of science and beauty."  The
violin has been painted with a woman's own blood, the maker's muse and
wife.  It is not insignificant.  In Austria, it was played by a small
little boy who could have resulted into great and famous things had he
not died.  Kasper's performances were startlingly superb, filled with
longing and vibrancy.  This orphan expressed his sadness and loneliness
through the instrument.  When it was found with gypsies, it was one of
the only things that brightened up their lives.  Pope used it to express
his sexual desires and lusts.  His orgasmic playing was inspired by
making love to his women; he played while having sex.  In China, it is
the one greatness in the cloudiness of Communism.
Samuel L. Jackson has a little role here as a collector who lusts after
it more than anyone- not only does he want it for its historical
context, he also thinks it is the most "beautiful acoustic machine" ever
made and he wishes to share this with his daughter, his family, pass the
soul of Anna Bussotti and history and continents down.
The Red Violin also tells of the need for perfection, for music, for
uplifting.  The symbol of perfection for those attending the auction is
Bussotti's violin and the cinematography aids in making the instrument
seem priceless; meticulously and closely inspecting its lines, wood,
strings, the red color.  The Red Violin is about the need and wish to
preserve this perfection, to never let it die.  When a violin is
confiscated by Communist officials in China from a music teacher, he
wearily throws it into the fire.  He is infinitely glad when he learns
that this instrument is still alive in China, the woman who owns the red
violin gives it to him as a present.  The score is wonderfully
evocative; the little orphan in Austria doesn't speak much, but we
understand him clearly through his glorious violin performances.
There are flaws, of course, in the film.  There is a particularly erotic
scene in which Frederick Pope is making love to his girlfriend; as she
kisses him, he plays fiercely, aroused- spelling, musically, his passion
and gratification.  I wish the film had made the sexual details elusive;
it would have been more intense and interesting to listen to the music
alone instead of hearing the music and seeing the activities producing
its ardent quality simultaneously.  The imagery gets in the way of the
powerful violin.
There is also a supernatural subplot that is painfully obvious in its
absurdity.  The fortune-teller, who is intercut with the violin's
journey and the auction, throughout the film, tells that whoever comes
in contact with Anna Bussotti will have tragedy befall them.  When the
violin, drenched in her blood, is in the hands of players, they die soon
later.  This adds childishness and silliness to otherwise serious and
sophisticated material.
I especially enjoyed the scenes in which the violinists perform.  They
are obviously playing with all their heart and soul; they breathe
deeply, in and out, frequently, as if all their strength and emotions
are fueling the music's fire.  The Red Violin is mightily ambitious: is
in five languages and more than five countries.  It attempts to document
the life of this gem, this invaluable violin that has touched and
brought harmony, passion, and fervor to the lives of unhappy people.  It
has gone through centuries of war, sex, and deceit.  The Red Violin
borders on greatness and mediocrity, pushing more towards the mediocre;
but what is great about it: its mapping of the human desire, is more
than sufficiently absorbing.

Title
Review for Taxi Driver (1976)
Martin Scorsese's films don't age.  Taxi Driver is one of his most
timeless efforts, along with The Last Temptation of Christ, Mean
Streets, GoodFellas, and Raging Bull.  His films are usually filled with
overt anger and fury at society, the mob, New York He is so
indescribably talented: he mixes his rage with hidden gems of humor.
Beyond the gun fights, the blood, and the swearing is a message on
society, something brilliantly and brutally real, something about
America, and something about the world.  This is enough to garner
respect and admiration- but he has also assisted in film preservation
and his risqué attitudes advanced the state of auteur motion pictures.
Taxi Driver is fiery, enraged, and feels like poison- the streets of New
York are devilishly depicted as the homes of prostitutes, pimps, and
drug dealers.  It is uncomfortable, it is eerie.
Robert DeNiro, in his highly acclaimed and revolutionary performance, is
Travis Bickle, a man who is an outsider in New York.  He hates New York
with a passion and cannot wait to perform his vengeance on the city.
What is compelling is that Travis himself is not pure.  His morals are
so poorly structured that he thinks pornography is what normal people
watch.  He drives his taxi nights, he is an insomniac.  When he sees
Betsy, a political campaigner (Cybill Shepherd), he sees what he wishes
the world would be filled with- pure people like her.  He is slinky
while pursuing her and she eventually dates him.  When that fails, his
repression becomes too much- he must find an outlet through which he can
express himself.
For him, the easiest way to get rid of his fury is through violence.  He
buys a whole set if guns from an elusive drug dealer and begins playing
with them like a child plays with toys.  His burning wrath at New York
society is only increased by what he sees in his customers- people who
seek the death of their philandering wives, rich tycoons having flings
with hookers, and a twelve-year-old prostitute being battered by her
pimp.  This prostitute, Iris (Jodie Foster) fixes what Travis decides to
do with his life- he decides to save her from her wicked pimp Sport
(Harvey Keitel).  He believes that Iris should be in school, with her
parents.  He knows she has lost her innocence, but she can still return
to a happy childhood, she is only twelve.  Jodie Foster gives an
abnormally mature and preconscious performance as Iris and her knowledge
and identification with her character is deeply felt.  The finale where
Travis murders everyone who stands in the way of him saving this girl is
his way of doing something he thinks is good, full of heart, and
noteworthy, and also excreting his rage through violence.  It is so
chilling, so frightening because we know that this killing spree is only
a temporary way of distancing himself from his insanity.
Robert DeNiro's performance is so genius because he turned Travis Bickle
into a bitter Vietnam vet as charismatic as Humphrey Bogart, as twisted
as Jack Nicholson, and as thoughtful as Spencer Tracy.  He strips Travis
down to his rotten, unredeemed core.  The movie's score by the legendary
Bernard Hermann was recorded a day before he died- it is rip-roaring and
comical, staccato and consuming.
What is wrong with Taxi Driver is more of an opinion.  The movie is made
in such an- er- ugly way, the streets of New York are so congested, so
Midnight Cowboy-ish, so disgusting, and the movie is so unredeeming,
cold, and black-hearted- it is hard to care about the characters or care
for the movie at all.  The atmosphere is thick, humid, and wicked and
that is what detracts from appreciating this film.  It is a collection
of atrocities performed by this ill man, each one drawing a bit too much
attention to itself.
However, the power of the film is so shaking, so unsettling, it deserves
credit.  Martin Scorsese, with Taxi Driver, contributed to the world one
of the ugliest and scariest horror films ever.

Title
Review for Fiddler on the Roof (1971)
Norman Jewison is a great crafter of friendly, easy movies such as The
Thomas Crown Affair and The Cincinnati Kid, but his resume also boasts a
few titles that include provoking and thoughtful themes.  Among these
films are In the Heat of the Night, A Soldier's Story, and the
culture-influenced Fiddler on the Roof and Moonstruck.  What is so
glorious about the last two movies is that both are hearty fun, not
straying too far from the brilliant style that makes Jewison the
accomplished moviemaker he is.  Their parallels can be seen after
watching them- Fiddler on the Roof is a film based in Czarist Russia and
explores the traditions of a little Jewish town and Moonstruck explores
Italian families in New York.  Both films do it all so humorously that
the "education" is painless.
Released during the year of The French Connection and A Clockwork
Orange, Fiddler on the Roof had no hope of winning the Academy Awards'
Best Picture, but today, it is known as the last great epic musical ever
made.  Yet, it is not really a musical, at least not in the way most
musicals are.  It tells the story of Tevye (Topol), a Russian-Jewish man
who has five daughters (unfortunately no sons- alas!), a cow, and a
bickering but fun wife, Golde (Norma Crane).  Tevye is content with his
simple life in his simple town- when he sings "If I Were A Rich Man," he
only wonders; he longs, but does not grieve.  He talks to God and is
religious like all the people in his village.  When the town matchmaker
tries to find his older girls husbands, daughter Tzietel groans "The
last time she got me an old, bald man!"
"You want someone with hair, marry a monkey!" says the mother.
When the matchmaker finds Tzietel a husband, the butcher, the family is
overjoyed- after all, he is rich, old, and will take good care of her.
Tevye laughs, "I always wanted a son, but I wanted one a little younger
than me!"  Tzietel is not pleased.  She is in love with the town
ne'er-do-well (Leonard Frey) and when Tevye discovers this, he is
vexed.  "No girl should ever pick her own husband!" he thinks.  He soon
discovers that times are changing when a young man comes to the town
spreading his knowledge and reprimanding the townsfolk for not knowing
the goings-on in the world.
It is difficult for Tevye to face this reality; his world is a cage of
dull, yet happy life in which you settle for what you can get.  This
young man preaches different attitudes and it pains him to have to
accept and let go of the morals and traditions he has held fast to for
so long.  Soon, his daughters know this thing called "desire" and are
wanting to marry men they love, not old men they will have to serve.
Tevye is understanding and tries to conform as best he can.
There are many gems of comedy in Fiddler on the Roof.  You start to
realize how narrow and outrageously funny the old Jewish traditions
were, how limiting they were for people.  The townspeople's lives are so
simple that when Golde sends Tevye to talk to the butcher about
something (he does not yet know the butcher will ask for Tzietel's
hand), he thinks he will ask to buy his cow!  On Tzietel's wedding day,
it is hilarious to see Tevye and the butcher violently fighting only
seconds after they have spoken cordially to each other.  When the
matchmaker finds husbands for Tevye's two little girls, Golde asks
"Which boy for which girl?"  In return, the matchmaker shrugs and says,
"Does it matter?  Take your pick."
Those who aren't fond of musicals will hate Fiddler on the Roof at first
listen.  At the beginning, the townspeople join in a performance of a
sickeningly bland song called "Tradition".  A) The song is scathing and
B) it does not meet the standards an audience is likely to have set if
they have ever seen other parts of this movie.  This film is mammoth, an
epic as grand as Doctor Zhivago, yet as simple as a childhood
fairytale.  Once away from that blasted and dreaded pre-title sequence,
things get so much better.  Isaac Stern's violin croons in the
background.
Fiddler on the Roof is very literal-minded.  There is nothing hidden
behind its sleeves, nothing particularly striking, except for its
refreshing humor and honest heart.  The cinematography gives the film a
dull feel- the film's palette includes subdued browns, oranges, reds,
and greens.  What is exceptionally intriguing is Topol, the actor behind
the Tevye character.  He is a big man with a deep voice.  He makes a
fool of himself while dancing moronically in the "If I Were a Rich Man"
sequence, then becomes sincere in his conversations with God.  This
mixture of emotions and personalities make his performance the jewel
that it is.  He is a large, joyful presence that makes the film a sunny
experience, at least for the first hour.  The final two hours are filled
with turbulent emotions, when father collides with daughter and reality
collides with the little town.
The music in Fiddler on the Roof is beautiful, but the dance-and-music
sequences are not used for the same purpose as they are used in a West
Side Story-type musical.  The songs are lyrically-mediocre, but the
musical sequences are not to showcase great songwriting (the
songwriting, frankly, is mere) but to tell and enhance the story.  The
characters use the songs for telling their story, not to show off their
dancing skills and singing skills (of which most of the performers have
only average capabilities).  This makes the music almost operatic.  It
isn't opera but, like operas (which aren't showy displays of excellent
songwriting; the songs are simply undulating collections of notes),
their only purpose is to give a musical translation of the story, to add
on to what is already being said.  Most musicals use music, dance, and
song deliberately- to show dancing, singing, and songwriting
capabilities.  Fiddler on the Roof is filled with tiny songs that are
just melodic extensions of the tale being told.
Moonstruck, made a little more than a decade after Fiddler on the Roof,
is not a musical, but the music gives it a certain atmosphere.  Dean
Martin belts out "That's Amore" during the opening titles, setting the
tone for this very Italian movie.  Cher is radiant here, and very funny-
she, Olympia Dukakis, and Vincent Gardenia are like a chorus- each
singer hitting the right note, making an extremely funny study of New
York-Italian family and tradition.
The down-to-earth Loretta (Cher) accepts the proposal of a timid and
nearly empty-headed bachelor (Danny Aiello) whom she has been in
acquaintance with for some time.  The proposal sequence is hilarious-
Loretta, who has been hurt by the death of an earlier husband, demands a
proper proposal, complete with groveling, a ring, and full names
stated.  Only minutes later, she is fighting with her fiancee over when
the wedding will be.  She wants a good date, one free of bad luck.  Her
fiancee is soon off for Palermo to see his dying mother whom he is very
devoted to.
When at home, Loretta's mother asks, "Do you love him?"
"Good, when you love them they drive you crazy because they know they
can."
This is the rationale Loretta has been taught and her insipidness to
love and romance makes for good comedy.  Like in Fiddler on the Roof,
Moonstruck also dabbles into its studied culture and its reasons for
getting married.
Loretta has been asked by her fiancee to invite his brother (Nicolas
Cage) to the wedding; they have been on bad terms for years.  When the
reason for the distance between the two brothers is revealed, it is
outrageous!  "He cut off my hand!" bellows Cage.  His hand being cut
off, in reality, was related to his brother but, if it was anyone's, was
his own fault- the bread-slicer caught hold of his hand while he was
talking to his brother.
John Patrick Shanley, the author of Moonstruck's script builds the
sexual tension between Cage and Cher.  It ends in an eruption including
a toppling table and screaming.  Cage loves Cher but she is too
level-headed to believe in love.  Nicolas Cage is an actor who always
seems like he's in a dream- he uses this quality of his very well while
his character is in love with Loretta.  There is a momentous speech in
which Cage's character is very direct- "I don't care about tomorrow, or
the next day.  All I know is I want to sleep with you and I don't care
if both of us burn in hell!"  It is refreshing to see such a twist on
the typical movie serenade.
It turns out that the moon has concocted a spell on the people of New
York and has made everyone fall in love.  Dukakis becomes acquainted
with a flirtatious middle-aged professor (John Mahoney); Gardenia falls
for a ditzy woman; a loveless, aging marriage has been rekindled; and
Cher and Cage fall madly in love.
The scenes with Olympia Dukakis are a joy, but it is Cher, Italian
accent and all, that carries this film.  She is bubbly in the role of a
rather dry woman.  She demands attention- when she's angry, like in the
scene where she slaps Cage and screams "Snap out of it!", and when she's
full of love, kicking an empty bottle along the street.  She seems like
she's floating in those scenes and has such an engaging presence that
she is able to have so much responsibility on her back and still be
fully enjoyable.
Moonstruck, though it has several Italian nuances and can very much be
considered an ethnic comedy, is, at its core, a delicious romance.  It
is full of savvy, but is gooey and marshmallowey inside.  Jewison,
Shanley, and the cast have cooked a dish that tastes like chicken, but
with Italian seasonings- and it tastes delicious.
Fiddler on the Roof is much warmer than Moonstruck, which has a bit of a
sarcasm to it.  Both are very slim and simple movies: Fiddler disguised
as an epic and Moonstruck disguised as a culture study.  Both are
satisfying, and like all good movies, should be savored.
Visit my site at http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Guild/9891/
Please?

Title
Review for Age of Innocence, The (1993)
The Age of Innocence is a romantic Taxi Driver.  Martin Scorsese, the
master of the furious film, still maintains the fury that lived in Taxi
Driver and Raging Bull and Mean Streets.  The Age of Innocence is about
the anger at society that those that do not wish to conform feel.  It is
about passion- for life, love, and passion itself.  Set in New York in
the late 1800s, it is based on Edith Wharton's Pulitzer Prize-winning
classic.  The film is one of supreme visual elegance and deep, intense
inner-emotion, one of mores and crookedness and repression.
Newland Archer (Daniel Day-Lewis) is the equivalent of Taxi Driver's
Travis Bickle character.  He has no anger at the social rules of this
era, he doesn't quite notice or acknowledge their narrowness at the
beginning of the film.  He is engaged to be married to a sweet, young
girl named May Welland (Winona Ryder): the two are from major, prominent
New York families; their being betrothed has very little to do with
love, but has everything to do with class and tradition.  Newland is
content to lead a little, frigid life with May because he has been
taught to feel this way.  People in this twisted world never get married
for affection- that simply isn't the way they think or maneuver.
When Newland meets Countess Ellen Olenska (Michelle Pfeiffer), May's
cousin who has just come from her ruined marriage in Europe, he
immediately knows this is what he has secretly aspired for all his
life.  Ellen is not a very "moral" person by social standards.  She
married outside the New York rules, to a foreigner, and she has the
audacity to return to America with the news of divorce.  Ellen is a
fiery, radiant symbol of Newland's desires, which he has just begun to
fully realize.  Yes, he has affection for the petite socialite May
Welland, though it is on the mild side.  But he yearns for passion, and
that is against every one of the unspoken commandments of this New York
circle.  He decides to aid Ellen in her divorce issues; he is a
well-to-do lawyer who can give insight into the matter.
Meanwhile, gossip is floating about the many banquets and parties being
held in New York.  Newland finds all this gossip irritating; it is so
uninformed, so silly and infantile, so undignified in a society that
demands "dignity".  He occasionally argues with the men and women who
condemn Ellen for her pursuit of her marriage's end and her getting
married in the first place.  Newland inserts a comment here and there;
none are especially radical, but we know he is bottling up his annoyance
at these social gatherings held to bash Ellen Olenska- the very
annoyance that Taxi Driver's protagonist rid himself of through
violence.  Newland is kind to Ellen and visits her often.  He makes
plans to have his wedding hurried, at an earlier date, a plan meant to
suffocate his passionate thoughts for the Countess.
There are parts of the film that are crafted just like a play.  When
Newland asks May for an earlier wedding, she comes up, out of the blue,
with an accusation.  She wonders if his demands for an earlier wedding
date have been spawned from the love of another.  She rambles for a
while on the situation, and then, the scene fades out her talking and
focuses on Newland and the changes in his facial expressions.  Elmer
Bernstein's amazing score raps itself around his emotions and carries
them to us.  May's words fade back in as Newland catches himself
daydreaming about Ellen Olenska, and brings himself back to reality.  He
attacks May's accusation, saying he has never loved anyone else but
her.  "Oh Newland, you really do love me, I'm so happy!" May responds.
Ellen finally realizes Newland's lust for her.  He doesn't seem, at
first, to be coveting her so much as coveting her aura, her danger.
There is a violent hunger in him, but unlike what the Travis Bickle
character did with his hunger, Newland does not fully carry his desires
through.  There is angst in him, as there was in Travis, but it is shown
only in complete secrecy.  Ellen, we learn, has come to share Newland's
feelings of love and passion and their love scenes are some of the most
sensual I have ever seen.  The two are fully clothed, but even the
simple touching of hands (which are usually gloved) is stirring, more so
than most gratuitous nudity in films.  It is almost like Elizabeth
Taylor and Montgomery Clift's love for each other in A Place in the Sun-
both have a strong desire to be with each other but there is a river
between them, a river between classes.  Archer and Olenska must cross a
river of unfeeling mores, one both are reluctant to cross.
But, eventually, there comes a time when Newland cannot continue to have
Ellen as his mistress.  He is married to May, who realizes the growing
distance between them, and the maze and game of secrecy Newland and
Ellen are playing is becoming too tangled.  May is pregnant and Ellen's
husband continues to call for her from Europe.  As much as they want
each other, neither is extremely willing to further disrupt New York
society's social balance (or imbalance.)  This is the struggle that is
the core of the film.
There is another scene that uses the play-like qualities effectively.
Newland and Ellen meet at the same opera they met for the first time
at.  This opera is the same one people go to every year, one followed by
the same party, one that holds memories.  At the conclusion of an act,
the noise of the opera house is quieted, and all is dark except for
Newland and Ellen.  Scorsese uses this technique to focus on their
conversation.  It's really rather interesting, even if it isn't entirely
original.
The Age of Innocence is a film of great visual beauty.  Dante Ferretti,
the great production designer, creates a world so different from ours-
the world of Merchant-Ivory films, New York in the 19th century.  Every
set is lovingly made and perfection to the very last detail.  Gabriella
Pescucci's Academy Award-winning costumes have yet to be matched by a
period piece (Elizabeth is a good contender for surpassing Pescucci's
costumes' elegance, though.)  They, like Ferretti's sets, are extremely
detailed.  Michael Ballhaus's photography is simply gorgeous.  The man
doesn't make a wrong turn or lighting decision, as far as I can see.
Thelma Schoonmaker, who has edited Scorsese pictures since the early
years of his career, is a miraculous editor, and her work with The Age
of Innocence can be compared to her work in Raging Bull.  Also notable
is the title sequence, one fashioned by the great Saul Bass.  It is the
first great title sequence I have seen this decade, a visit to the long,
interesting title sequences of the 50s.
The Age of Innocence is a film of extreme pathos and the evils of
society conformity, themes that have been touched on in hundreds of
movies, but have rarely been crafted so eloquently. Some people may be
put off by its complicated narration (by Joanne Woodward) which
discusses almost everything and the goings-on of the characters and the
society.  I urge all to see it, however.  Its complexity may be a bit
too much for some to decipher, but the basic emotions of the principle
characters are not In the end, the film leads to Newland's remembrance,
that is filled with a silent sadness.  He prays for the knowledge of a
coming era, hopefully one that leaves behind the unwritten social rules
that held him back from being with the woman he truly loved.

Title
Review for Viskningar och rop (1972)
Viskningar och Rop (Cries and Whispers)
Directed by Ingmar Bergman
Starring Harriet Andersson, Ingrid Thulin, and Liv Ullman
Rated R (strong adult themes)
Cries and Whispers is a very painful movie to endure: a film that numbs
you with its blood-red images, then works its
semi-surrealistic/semi-realistic voodoo.  It is at the forefront of
critics' favorites of Ingmar Bergman's female explorations.  It is
shocking, difficult, and frightening.  It is eminent and luminous.
Here we have four women living in a castle draped in a harsh scarlet
color, three of whom are sisters.  Agnes (Harriet Andersson) is dying of
cancer and her two unstable sisters come to aid her and walk her into
the next world: Maria (Liv Ullman) and Karin (Ingrid Thulin.)  The
servant Anna (Kari Sylwan) waits in the wings to give emotional
uplifting to Agnes.  Such is the basic premise of Cries and Whispers, an
intensely haunting experience that is both memorable and shaking.  Made
in 1972, it was one of Bergman's last great films before he exited the
cinema world altogether with his last hoorah Fanny and Alexander in
1982.  Years before making Cries and Whispers, Bergman had directed one
of my all-time favorite films Persona, which also starred Ullman.  Like
that film, Cries and Whispers shows Bergman trying to blend dream-like
images and visions with true-to-life, earthly feelings and topics.
Persona was a film that explored the day-in-day-out masquerade of life;
this film explores the effects of death- the fear that results and the
realizations and truth that unfolds.  With a backdrop of red curtains,
walls, and wine (Bergman pictured red as the color of the soul's
interior), master Ingmar Bergman evokes dreadful emotions through the
faces of his four principle actresses.
Agnes, a pure, chaste character, is, we soon discover, the only sister
of the threesome capable of love.  There are scenes in which she reaches
out to her sisters, only for them to turn their backs on her.  Agnes'
death infuriates them because they now realize the emptiness of their
own existence, their own pettiness, and the lack of love they have for
her, others, and themselves.  Karin is masochistic and suicidal, a woman
in a rotting marriage to an as unfeeling man.  Maria is a philanderer, a
flirtascious, feline temptress who has captured Agnes' doctor (Erland
Josephsan) for her prey.  There is a perfect sequence in which we learn
that both sisters have lost the knowledge of touching- the feeling of
flesh on flesh.  This has resulted from years of coldness, insipidness,
indifference.  In this legendary scene, the two touch each other's
faces, hands, and hair as if it were the first time they had ever
touched someone before.  No words are needed so Bach and Tchaikovsky
take over.
Anna is silent and subservient, ready to supply the love and affection
Agnes so desires and needs that she cannot get from her heartless
sisters.  Anna and Agnes are very similar- both are gentle and seem to
have few needs- only the need for love. Karin and Maria explore touching
and feeling because they don't know anything about love, only
sexuality.  Their innocence has been lost, they have become stone
figures.  The passionate red that cloaks the mansion is a very present
color that opposes the lack and loss of passion in Karin and Maria, and
signifies the yearning for that same passion in Agnes and Anna.
There isn't any important dialogue in the film- the bulk of its meaning
and importance lies in the poetic, fiery pictorial strength that Bergman
and all-mighty cinematographer Sven Nykvist, Bergman's collaborator for
30 years, have created.  Silence is most certainly golden here, in a
film that is about death, life, touching, skin, love, and its absence.
The images remind me of the lustrous sights in Bernardo Bertolucci
films, but while Bertolucci's images are more liquid and flowing and
beautiful, Bergman's images are static and free of the heavy use of
details.  The whole film is told through facial expression- Agnes' face
is pale, dying, yet most lively; Anna's is calm, tired, yet passionate;
Maria's is flirtatious and naďve; and Karin's is sinister and stagnant.
When Karin yells "Don't touch me!", it almost seems like her drama is
all just a play- it's been made evident that she finds pleasure in
misery and self-destruction.  Her face wrinkles up in pain, but I could
almost detect a nuance of gratification in her face.  When Maria denies
to help her husband who has just stabbed himself with a knife, we know
she is stone-cold.  When she smiles at Agnes' doctor in the mirror, he
dissects her face, telling her about her "wrinkles of indifference" and
"chin of indulgence."  On the landscape of Agnes' face, we see her
longing: she is dying but because of her charity and love, she is more
alive than any of the sisters.
One may be surprised to know that the characters are rather one-sided.
Agnes is the virtuous, in-white puritan; Anna is the obeying, caring
maid; Maria is the slinky two-timer; and Karin is the dark, deathly
rock.  None of the characters go beyond that.  This is no flaw though,
because Cries and Whispers is not character-driven, but idea and
image-driven.
Heaven knows I couldn't sleep after watching this film.  It makes your
muscles stiff from start to finish, and you become a part of this
surrealistic Bergman vision that you don't exit from even after the film
ends.  At the end of Cries and Whispers, Maria and Karin are no better
off than they were when the film started- they deny their touching
escapade and move on with their flat lives; after Agnes' funeral, they
don't discuss how much they miss her, they only thank God it wasn't too
gloomy.

Title
Review for Ladri di biciclette (1948)
Roberto Rossellini and Vittorio DeSica ushered in the Italian film
movement known as neorealism.  It was a highly influential movement in
search of "pure cinema"; its rules asked its filmmaker followers to
create movies around very simple, ordinary lives and extract a human
truth.  The Bicycle Thief is arguably the most famous, important, and
celebrated film of this 1940's Italian cinema era and it's also hailed
as one of the best films ever made.  That it is: it is deeply moving and
thrilling and simple.  Several friends of mine thought the whole film
was an awful mistake- much ado about nothing.  I find it realistic
because it doesn't smooth out the bitterness in its story; it describes
a difficult period in time for postwar Italy; and, most importantly, it
accentuates a complex and beautiful relationship between its father and
son protagonists.  Films like these are so telling about why a good bulk
of motion pictures are lame.
The entire film is dedicated to the search of a bicycle.  Antonio Ricci
(Lamberto Maggiorani, a non-professional actor chosen by DeSica) is
shown at the beginning amidst a flock of unemployed townspeople.  He may
have just won a job but he soon discovers it requires a bicycle.  He has
already pawned his bicycle to feed his family, but he lies and gets the
job.  His wife (Lianella Carell) pawns the bed sheets so Antonio can get
a bike for his job.  He has been hired as a poster hanger and, on his
first day, he hangs Rita Hayworth posters all over Rome.
His bike is soon stolen by a thief, impoverished like himself.  He goes
to the police but they are no help.  He begins a tedious hunt for the
bike, clumsily attempting to sift through every bicycle in Rome.  Bruno
(Enzo Staiola), his son, accompanies him.  The two meet a variety of
people, many of which are poor and desperately trying to make money.
There is an elderly woman who claims to have mystical powers as a
psychic.  Throngs of weakened folk line up outside her door.  There is a
poor old man who finds sanctuary in church.  Towards the end of the
film, Antonio sees his thief on the streets and follows him back home.
The young man is very weak and when Antonio demands his bicycle back,
the neighborhood gangs up against him, feverishly scolding him for
accusing helpless people.
There's a sort of unity and isolation DeSica depicts between the
poverty-stricken citizens of Italy.  Everyone is scrounging to make a
buck to feed their families, but heated desperation often leads these
men to steal needed materials from other men just like them.  It is an
ugly cycle and Antonio continues it at the end when he, at the breaking
point, tries to steal a seemingly abandoned bike on the streets.  He is
caught and suddenly is able to slightly empathize with the thief who did
him wrong.  The poor are all connected in the film: they don't need
pleasure, they need money.
Neorealism allows truth to sprout from truthful, realistic situations.
The Bicycle Thief is not all misery.  We are able to witness the
shifting roles of a father-son relationship.  Antonio is a caring father
and, after the tiresome search, he has just about given up on finding
his bike in the huge city.  He treats his son and himself to a meal.
They are only able to afford mozzarella on bread and DeSica's camera
shows a wealthier family at a table nearby Antonio's.  The family is
eating as many servings of pasta as they desire.  Antonio and Bruno try
to get drunk on wine but the realization is still clear and pervasive:
Antonio can hardly afford this meal.  And his bicycle is not likely to
turn up.  It is a warm scene that sums up the loving relationship
between Antonio and Bruno.
The Bicycle Thief is so interesting because it shows a great equality
between the two.  Antonio is sometimes allowed to be a great, caring,
capable father who is responsible for Bruno.   Sometimes, the boy is
allowed to be the fathering figure.  Their bond is the highlight of this
masterpiece.
The Bicycle Thief is not as famous as it used to be.  It seems to have
fallen out of the sight of the public eye.  Hopefully it will be
rediscovered as one of cinema's finest films.  It has an indelible
simplicity that's full and contemplative, from which grows a complexity
of relationships, people, and humanity.  DeSica seamlessly weaves
complexity into simplicity, giving us brilliant performances by
non-actors, breathtaking cinematography, and a fable that restores a
viewer's faith in honest and profoundly moving storytelling.

Title
Review for Do the Right Thing (1989)
Do the Right Thing
Directed by Spike Lee
Starring Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Richard Edson, Giancarlo
Esposito, Spike Lee, Bill Nunn, John Turturro, John Savage, Rosie Perez
USA, 1989
Rated R (profanity, some violence, brief nudity)
Do the Right Thing, Spike Lee's directorial breakthrough, is not a film
about taking sides but about taking a stand.  The film was very
controversial when it was released a decade ago, in 1989, but it rings
so true in a world that claims it is free of racism, but, actually, is
still sick with it.  Two opposing quotations, one by Martin Luther King,
Jr. and one by Malcolm X, close the film they discuss the morality of
racial violence, leaving us neither north nor south, but in a state of
thought, hopefully.  The film takes place in Brooklyn, in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood.  Sal's (Danny Aiello) Pizzeria has been
here for years, the people of this neighborhood grew up on his pizza.
Sal is one of the few Caucasian people who live in this neighborhood.
His sons have lived here all their lives and help him run the place:
Vito (Richard Edson) is the little brother, meek and friendly with the
predominantly black neighborhood; Pino (John Turturro) is full of hatred
(in private) for the blacks, even though, as employee Mookie (Spike Lee)
points out, his favorite basketball player, actor, and singer are all
black.  To this observation, Pino responds, "Well, they're not really
black.  I mean, they're more than black to me."
This is the world Spike Lee plunges us into- the streets of this little
neighborhood on the very hottest day of the year.  Temperatures have
risen to 98°, and everyone is being scorched by the sun.  Lee, who
wrote, produced, starred, and directed this film so exceptionally,
revolves the story around Sal's Pizzeria and peppers it with memorable,
interesting characters.  Da Mayor (Ossie Davis) is an elderly man, the
neighborhood bum and drunk.  On this hellishly-hot day, he tries to
reach out to Mother Sister (Ruby Dee, Davis' real-life wife), a woman
who is always cold toward him.
Buggin' Out (Giancarlo Esposito) is a friend of Mookie's who questions
Sal as to why only Italian celebrities are on his restaurant wall and
there are no blacks.  There's Frank Sinatra, Sophia Loren, Al Pacino-
but no Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, Rosa Parks, Aretha Franklin.  He
demands that Sal put some black people's pictures on the wall; after
all, this is a black neighborhood and majority of the people who eat at
the pizzeria are not Italian, but are black.  When Sal refuses, he plans
to boycott the pizzeria and goes on a quest to find those who will join
him.
Radio Raheem (Bill Nunn) is a stoic young man whose only valued
possession seems to be his radio, which he carries with him everywhere
so that it seems to be a part of his body.  He plays Public Enemy's
"Fight the Power" anthem of racial liberation continually, which drives
Sal insane.
Clifton (John Savage) is a character who only appears briefly in the
film, but is the target of neighborhood jeers because he is a white man
living on this street.  Rosie Perez made her debut here as Mookie's
enraged girlfriend, and Samuel L. Jackson is the DJ at a local radio
station WE-LOVE.
The entire film is filled with racial tension.  There is Buggin' Out and
Radio Raheem's anger and avoidance of Sal's Pizzeria, and there is also
the prejudice that is aimed at the owners of a Korean grocery store.
The blacks aren't very happy about the Koreans; they make fun of how
they speak and badger them constantly.  At the huge, climactic end, fury
breaks loose at Sal and his Italian family.  Mookie, one of the main
characters, is a passive guy for most of the movie, and struggles to
keep his girlfriend and baby son happy.  He doesn't care much about
racial violence or issues, he just goes about his pizza delivering job
and, basically, doesn't really care.
In this neighborhood, racial bigotry is present and evident, but not
realized.  Throughout the duration of this scorching day, racial
tensions mount and pile up, until, in the much-discussed conclusion, all
racial hell breaks loose.  Spike Lee doesn't tell you that acting
against racism violently is wrong, but he doesn't tell you it's right
either.  He doesn't tell you the blacks are right and the Caucasians are
wrong, or vise versa.  He doesn't even tell you to figure out who's
right and who's wrong, but hopefully what people will take away from
this film is that figuring things like that out and coming to
conclusions and putting the blame on a race is wrong to begin with and
just plants more seeds for wrath to grow.
Do the Right Thing is one of the most visually beautiful and colorful
movies I've seen in a long time.  The neighborhood is like a wonderful
work of graffiti art; so radiant with bright colors- of walls, houses,
clothes (costumes by the wonderful Ruth Myers), and skin.  Ernest
Dickerson does one of the most breathtaking cinematography jobs I've
seen.  Not only is the lighting perfect, many of the angles are slanted,
showing a one-sided, racially confused world.  Throughout the film, the
sweat and the heat are all filmed so masterfully and flawlessly.
In the film, an abrupt change of pace, from positive to negative, from
pleasant to melancholy, brings about the now famous sequence of racial
violence.  It is so unexpected, so unthinkable, yet, it fits.  Spike Lee
doesn't tell us, he shows us, and we see.  We see many ethnic worlds
colliding- the world of the Hispanics, the world of the Koreans, the
world of the whites, and the world of the blacks.  It's a shocking
sequence.
I haven't seen a film so powerful in its tackling of this ever- relevant
racial subject, and I doubt I will ever see one like it in a long time.
The movie doesn't fool around with the topic at hand, it lays down the
facts.  The ending isn't some hand-in-hand ring-around-the-roses between
the blacks and whites, because that isn't where America is at at this
point.  The movie is sharp and provocative, but funny, witty, and
wonderfully entertaining.  There are movies that are simply for
entertainment, and then there are movies that are simply made to tell a
message.  Then there's Do the Right Thing.

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Today, most of the teenage flicks are about high schoolers getting into
grotesque, drunken situations involving sex, drugs, booze, and
violence.  While Welcome to the Dollhouse did it all sensibly,
Jawbreaker, Varsity Blues, and the like are all examples of the
teen-flick norm today.  Out of this junk comes a movie based on a true
story and while it isn't exceptional or particularly fresh, it is a
great change of pace from the ultimately drab and cynical movies that
are coming out of the studios aiming for teenage audiences.  The story
feels old and used, but it is moving.  I admit to not wanting to see
this movie- the commercials promised melodrama.  While October Sky is
melodrama, it is better than most because its intentions are good   At
the end, the drama is overdone, but its emotion is sufficient.  Maybe
I'm praising October Sky because I'm sick of what the usual teenage
movie has to offer.  The movie isn't exactly master filmmaking, it
sometimes falls into the Ditch of Melodrama Normalcy, and Laura Dern
doesn't do anything I can perceive as strong.  I'll know in a few years
time when I look back on this film.  Right now, I can't deny that I was
uplifted and enjoyed the story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gylenhaal), a young
man aspiring for the stars.
October Sky centers on Homer, who is surrounded by a small town and
narrow-minded townsfolk.  With the sight of Sputnik, a Cold War
milestone, Homer has become interested in rockets and science.  His
father (Chris Cooper in a fine performance) is both disappointed and
angry that his son is interested in these subjects.  Young men in this
town stay there, unless they get a football scholarship elsewhere.  It
has always been tradition for the men to work in the coal mines.  Homer
looks at the mine as the Place of Evil and Blackness- when his father
gets sick in the middle of the film and he must take over his job and go
down into the mines, the look on his face shows more than reluctance- he
looks up into the sky as if his father and God have betrayed him.
Urged on by his teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern), Homer convinces his
friends Roy Lee, O'Dell, and a science nerd, Quentin to help him make a
rocket that would be Science Fair potential.  This rocket may be their
ticket out of the crumminess of their native town.  Homer, a boy who's
math grades are waning, is the most determined of the group- he studies
trigonometry and all sorts of math subjects to help in his building of
the rocket.  There is a fire in his eye when he feels his rocket will
blast off into space.  His hopes for entering the Science Fair are
dashed by the discovery that his rocket may have lit a forest fire.  The
fire in his eyes dies and he succumbs to his parents' wishes- he works
in the mines.
I saw this movie in the dollar theater and there was a wretched man
screaming at the top of his lungs "jerk" whenever Homer's father had a
disagreement with him.  The script and Chris Cooper, thank heaven, don't
make Homer's dad a stereotype-bad-guy-underestimating-parent, but a man
confused by new thoughts, like Topol in Fiddler on the Roof, or Rock
Hudson in Giant.  He wants the best for his son- but he wants the best
on his terms.  He believes that people should stick with what is normal,
what is common and ordinary and you can't blame him.  We can't always
understand him when he so cruelly represses  Homer's dreams of
rocketry.  His fights with Homer usually don't go beyond
mainstream-movie father-son arguments- it is usually when they're not
fighting that the film succeeds.  There is an especially stirring scene
in which Homer asks his father to come to one of the rocket launches.
His father doesn't want to, in any way, support this ambition of his
son's, but he doesn't want to let his son down.  There is no screaming
or shouting, just an uneasiness about the scene.
The later brawls between Homer and his father are what you would expect-
an exchange of "You wanna get out of this town so bad, then go!" and
"Yeah, I'll go, and I won't even look back!"  These scenes have their
emotional qualities, but they're primitively done, not that I expected
something on the lines of Orson Welles.  The movie gets you in such a
mood that, when it finally ends: when the father and son finally
connect, when the whole town pitches in to help Homer win the fair,
you're elated by this young man's strength- the fact that he broke
through the barriers set by parents and townspeople and mediocrity, the
barriers many people never cross, the barriers I bet Homer's father
wished he had crossed.  When October Sky is bad, it assaults us (maybe
assault' is a bit too strong) with its lack of ambition and its
ordinariness, and that is why I don't always admire it.
Homer Hickam now lives in Cape Canaveral training astronauts for NASA.
October Sky is not about rocketry, but about facing obstacles and
beating the odds against you.   I wish more kids had seen it.  The only
people I saw in the theater were senior citizens.  The movie has lots of
heart and good intentions and I wish people could see this instead of
the uncouth and presumptuous trash that brings the execs the dough
nowadays.

Title
Review for Raging Bull (1980)
Raging Bull is about violence.  It is a graphic film that uses time and
space in and out of the boxing ring to full effect.  The celebrated
1940s and '50s boxer, Jake LaMotta (Robert DeNiro), is portrayed here as
sleazy, jealous, and brutal; he's an animal.  For Martin Scorsese,
Robert DeNiro, and Paul Schrader, Raging Bull had to be made and their
passion paid off: over time, the film has become the team's most famous
achievement after Taxi Driver and has been named the best film of the
80s and one of the greatest films of all time.  It is a relentless
movie and the complete opposite of the much more affectionate tribute to
boxing, Rocky.
However, as critics are eager to point out, Raging Bull is not about
boxing.  It looks at the sport as an outlet for expressing one's
inclement emotions.  Jake LaMotta, a middleweight boxing champion, is
extremely violent in nature and he doesn't box for the sake of boxing
but to calm his frustrations.  To him, being inhumane is almost
medicinal.  Living in New York, LaMotta is plagued by several things but
mainly by his ever-present jealousy and suspicion of the women in his
life.  Being the brute that he is, he tries to turn his lovers into
subservient, timid creatures.  This ends his first marriage and scars a
second one to a blonde young woman named Vicki (Cathy Moriarty).
Jake's brother and manager, Joey (Joe Pesci), is similarly burdened by
him.  During the straining course of LaMotta's boxing career, Jake seems
to enjoy being the victim.  Seeking the sin of relatives and friends, he
pulls crimes out of thin air and accuses those close to him of them.
Vicki is loyal but emotionally emaciated by Jake's merciless scrutiny of
her every move.  She can't even say goodbye to a male acquaintance
without being interrogated by Jake.  We never learn if Vicki is cheating
on him but, from what we witness on screen, he has no good reason to
suspect her of betrayal.
The fights in Raging Bull, both in and out of the boxing ring, are
bloody.  Perfectly edited by Thelma Schoonmaker and exceptionally framed
and photographed by Michael Chapman, the film boasts several vicious
boxing sequences. We watch LaMotta punch his opponent into a pulp.  When
his wife briefly comments that a future opponent, Janiro, is
good-looking, he goes into a fit of rage.  When he finally fights
Janiro, he wounds his face so bad that a Mafia boss in the audience
quips "He ain't pretty no more." Martin Scorsese twists time and space
in the film, putting us inside the ring with two very angry men (there
are many sequences with LaMotta fighting Sugar Ray Robinson).  Scorsese
uses a stark soundtrack that is, at one moment, loud with screaming
spectators of a fight, then filled with quiet suspense as one rival
prepares to bloody the other.  Time and space is also manipulated
outside the ring.  To Jake, Vicki is an enigmatic, God-like figure.  We
see Vicki in slow-motion several times.  We also see those who LaMotta
believes to be Vicki's lovers in slow-motion.
Towards the end of the film, everyone leaves Jake. The last straw for
Joey is when Jake accuses him of cheating with Vicki.  It is amazing how
LaMotta blows every single movement of his wife out of proportion.
Vicki gives Joey a kiss and he goes flying with fury.  Vicki eventually
files for divorce when Jake retires and becomes a shoddy, overweight
emcee at bars.
The most famous scene in the film is LaMotta's recitation of the "I
coulda been a contenda" speech from On the Waterfront.  Jake's reading
tells us of his relationship with his estranged brother, Joey, and his
regret for becoming what he now seems to be, "a bum."  DeNiro delivers
the scene without a shred of emotion but the parallels between Terry
Malloy's situation in Waterfront and LaMotta's in Raging Bull are
evident and profound to us.
Robert DeNiro's performance is searing.  His gaining fifty pounds for
the role of Jake LaMotta has become one of Hollywood's greatest
behind-the-scenes stories.  More importantly, DeNiro succeeds in showing
us LaMotta's ugliness and brutality and, at the end, his pathetic but
present streak of humanity.  LaMotta reaches a place of loss and slight
self-revelation at the end of Raging Bull and DeNiro makes his crisis
subtlety moving.
Raging Bull seems to be Martin Scorsese's film, however.  Incorporating
his trademark Italian-flavored dialogue (which is often hilarious and
lightens up the heavy issues of human bondage at hand), his sense of
physical and emotional violence, and his way with actors, Scorsese made
Raging Bull an indisputable masterpiece.  It is one of the most
unsympathetic and saddening portraits of a character whose inner demons
have eaten away his integrity.

Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
The Piano
Directed by Jane Campion
Starring Holly Hunter, Harvey Keitel, Sam Neill, Anna Paquin
Australia, 1993
Rated R (strong sexual content, intense images, adult themes)
A+
Jane Campion wrote and directed The Piano, one of the most eloquent
films about the closeness of passion and repression I've ever seen.
Yes, she is a woman but, unlike what many people have said, The Piano is
not a feminist film and isn't about women.  It is, firstly, about lust,
then restriction, and, finally but least importantly, about love.  It is
a masterpiece saturated in evocative images and a film that succeeds,
perhaps, because a woman is behind the scenes.  Campion creates an
otherworldly place in the forests of New Zealand and she understands the
emotional power of eroticism.  She doesn't go for what many so-called
feminist films employ: she doesn't victimize any of her characters or
make any of them criminals, either, which is a great asset to a film
that portrays the complexity of the situations we get into because of
passion.
A nineteenth century woman named Ada (Holly Hunter) brings her daughter,
Flora (Anna Paquin), to New Zealand.  Ada is mute, presumably by choice,
and is arranged to wed Stewart (Sam Neill), a British man she has never
met.  When she arrives in New Zealand, her husband refuses to take her
beloved piano, her only source of expression, back to his house.  He
says it is too heavy.  Flora, Ada's illegitimate daughter, is a very
vocal child and helps her mother demand the piano be brought back to the
house.  Stewart does not realize the piano, over Ada's mute years, has
become synonymous to her heart and soul.  Without it, she has no means
of speaking in the language of emotion and is completely miserable and
soulless.
There is an uneasiness between Ada and Stewart already.  Baines (Harvey
Keitel), a British immigrant who has abandoned his native land's customs
in favor of Maori attitudes of freedom, offers Stewart a good amount of
land for the piano after he takes Ada to the beach and hears her play.
Some of cinematographer Stuart Dryburgh's most beautiful images here are
those of Ada with her piano on a deserted expanse of the beach.  Baines
is struck by Ada's frightening intimacy with her piano and becomes
attracted to her.  Ada refuses to give her piano, her soul, to this man,
an illiterate.  Stewart becomes angry and tells her she must make
sacrifices for her family.
The piano, which is explored in great, stunning detail by Dryburgh's
camera, is sold to Baines in exchange for the land.  He requests lessons
from Ada but when she consents, he will not play.  Instead, he offers
her her piano in exchange for his sexual gratification.  She will "earn"
her piano back key by key if she lifts her dress and lies with him.  At
first, she refuses.  She finally accepts the offer; I'm not sure whether
if it was in a state of longing for her piano or a state of longing for
sex.  She is not a slut; what she feels is a primal human feeling.  It's
too easy to say she simply falls in love with Baines.  In the end, she
does have a deep love for him but she attains it gradually: first she
lies with him for her piano; soon, it is simply for her desire; later,
it becomes an entanglement of love and sex, maybe even of rebellion.
Stewart is portrayed as a cold man at first and Baines, an obsessed
man.  The Piano makes them deeper.  This is a thick film and we
sympathize with Stewart who cannot win Ada's love or sexual attention,
and we are allowed to witness the unexpected tenderness of Baines.  He
is truly a romantic, though he initially seeks romance with Ada through
obsessive sexual requests that border on blackmail.  Flora is
mischievous and her decisions are strange.  She is outspoken and tattles
on her mother and Baines, which leads to the most shattering sequence in
the entire film.
Shot very dramatically, this sequence has Stewart, who trusted Ada to
stay away from Baines, chopping off her finger with an ax.  We,
thankfully, don't see the actual violent act but, even more painful, we
see Ada's face turning blue and her absolute horror.
In the climactic scene, Baines, Ada, and Flora sail away from New
Zealand and away from Stewart to live together.  Ada demands her
"spoiled" piano be thrown overboard and, in a suicidal attempt, gets her
foot caught in the rope.  In a scene as haunting as the one previously
mentioned, Ada is tugged to the bottom of the ocean.  For several
moments, she simply waits to die.  Suddenly, she realizes what she has
done and wishes to live.  When she finally makes her way to the surface,
she has been mysteriously redeemed.  Her soul (her piano) lies
disintegrating at the bottom of the sea and she no longer is repressed.
Her piano-playing need not be her only source of expression and pleasure
anymore: she has discovered life, love, and passion.
Perhaps I have made The Piano seem sentimental and gooey.  It is moody,
definitely, but it is not melodramatically romantic.  It is romantic,
yes, and it sees love and passion as salvation, but it also sees love
and lust as clawing.  The Piano is about bondage and this is highlighted
by everything from the women's tight corsets to the inner struggle
within the characters.  By Jane Campion's screenplay not giving the
outlet of language to Ada, Holly Hunter is repressed somewhat.  In one
of the best performances I've seen this decade, or of any decade for
that matter, Hunter says everything with her face, body, and fingers.
One critic suggested that people are imagining Hunter's physical
expressions, however, Ada becomes real, despite the character's
enigmatic aura.
Hunter, though she gives the film's stand-out performance, is not the
only gifted actor in The Piano.  Let's not forget Harvey Keitel and Sam
Neill, men who are bound: Keitel's character by sexual and romantic
obsession; Neill's by jealousy and sexual inadequacy.  And Anna Paquin
is strange and precocious as Ada's daughter who must stand up for her
mother but is repressed by her humorous knack for telling tall-tales and
her desire to lie and tell her mother's secrets.
Stuart Dryburgh, using the photographic technique known as Autochrome,
supplies a great deal of overwhelming intensity, mysticism, and
otherworldliness to The Piano.  There are moments when the film is warm
and glowing with red, and other times when it is cold and dark blue.
Dryburgh is even able to shoot the bizarre intimacy between Ada and her
piano, Ada and her daughter, and Ada and Baines.  There is a certain
beauty about Ada's fingers gently caressing and falling upon piano
keys.  The Piano is a fiercely erotic film and there are scenes between
Ada and Baines that are heated and detailed.  These scenes are really
graphic, the most graphic I've ever seen, but they are not gratuitous or
pornographic and Dryburgh lights and frames them without flaw.  His
photography catches every nuance of New Zealand and the faces of The
Piano's characters.
Jane Campion is one of the few greatly acclaimed and successful female
directors around (I refer not to women's directorial ability but to
their obscurity in the field; sadly, I remember only Lina Wertmuller as
another such successful and talented female director, but she worked
ages ago).  There is both a universality and complexity to The Piano and
it is one of those rare films that is multi-faceted, shaking, and
engaging.  Campion's point of view on the world is extremely fascinating
and is different from a male's perspective.  She is one of the greatest
directors, male or female, of the 90s decade and The Piano is one of
the most haunting and poetic films I've ever seen.

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
There is something so magical about animation- it's taking art and
shaping it into a story.  Disney has captured the glory and significance
of this movie art form through the years and Tarzan's animation is
mesmerizing.  I wish I could say the same for the movie itself.  I liked
it a lot, but it doesn't hold up in the company of The Little Mermaid,
Aladdin, Beauty and the Beast, The Lion King, or The Hunchback of Notre
Dame.  Perhaps I find the latest Disney offerings (Pocahontas, Mulan,
Tarzan) somewhat disenchanted because I am growing up.  However, I still
continue to watch old Disney classics and the earlier 90s films and am
always thrilled by them.  Tarzan is good fun, though, and it even has
something to say - that perhaps a child can be raised by anyone, any
animal; that we can all live in harmony and peace together on this
earth, beast and man.
Set in Africa, the film begins with scenes of Tarzan's parents being
shipwrecked and building a house for themselves on the island upon which
they are stranded.  When Tarzan's two parents are killed by a viscous
leopard, ape Kala (Glenn Close), who has also lost her baby to the
leopard, adopts him as her own.  Her mate Kerchak (Lance Henriksen)
disapproves.  He is a melancholic ape who will, for most of the rest of
his life, taunt and be cold towards Tarzan.  There is a part of Kala who
thinks Tarzan can replace her dead baby.
As Tarzan grows up, he makes friends with Turk, another ape (Rosie
O'Donnell), and Tantor, an elephant (Wayne Knight).  When a group of
explorers visits the jungle, Tarzan is curious because they look exactly
like he does.  He is suddenly angry at his ape mother for hiding this
from him, the fact that there are people who look like him, and soon
discovers the truth of his adoption.  He befriends these humans, among
them a bubbly Minnie Driver character, a courageous, spunky girl named
Jane Porter.  She, her father (Nigel Hawthorne), and Clayton (Brian
Blessed), a man who is with them to protect them but seems to always go
against their wishes, are in the wilds to study gorillas.  Mr. Porter
has a theory that gorillas are social animals and are gentle.  Clayton,
the core villain of the film, thinks differently and is out to shoot
some.  When Jane is attacked by a group of monkeys, Tarzan comes to her
rescue, and then, they fall in love.  Tarzan must then decide whether he
wants to stay in the world he has known all his life or go back to where
he "belongs."
One of the movie's greatest flaws is the lack of a memorable villain.
The Gaston-like brute Clayton, is stupid and not frightening at all.
Because of this, Tarzan just isn't as fun as it could've been.  I
enjoyed Phil Collins' songs laden with percussion beats.  There is a
nice bounce to the beginning of the single version of the Rob Cavallo
co-produced "You'll Be In My Heart."  Though none of the songs are as
memorable as Disney's earlier theme songs, Collins' work fits the film
perfectly.  I enjoyed the voices, too.  I bet Rosie O'Donnell had a lot
of fun creating Terk's voice.  She kind of exaggerates too much and her
performance doesn't seem as natural as Minnie Driver's performance, but
she's fun.  Driver is enthusiastic and her magnetic self as Jane, and
Nigel Hawthorne is funny as Jane's lively father.
Over the years, I have set high standards for Disney movies.  They used
to have grandeur and heart, and while Tarzan has both, it is all to a
lesser degree.  Tarzan has a vibrant energy in its scenes in which
Tarzan is fighting with animals like leopards and wild monkeys, but as a
whole, the movie is disappointing; fun, but underwhelming.

Title
Review for Ulee's Gold (1997)
Bruce Barth's mellow piano plays in the background as conflict erupts in
a little country town of Florida.  Ulee's Gold feels like another Fonda
creation- On Golden Pond: it has a soft, calm surface with a tempest
brewing underneath, the cinematography creates a place of gold, yellow,
and olive colors, the music is stirring and tranquil.  Both deal with
the hardships of family life.  Peter Fonda gives his undoubtedly best
performance in Victor Nuńez's new film and Patricia Richardson (Home
Improvement star) shows she is worthy of big screen attention.  Nuńez is
probably independent film's greatest asset, along with John Sayles, and
he proves his talent with a slow pace and undulating, heavy tension.
Peter Fonda's performance borrows from his father Henry Fonda's in On
Golden Pond- there is a great vulnerability that he gives the character
Ulee Jackson and just like his father, Peter Fonda is quiet, emotional,
and weary in this exceptional role.  Ulee Jackson, the film's
protagonist, is struggling.  Pressure is mounting at the wrong time.  He
is a beekeeper and this is his "busy" season.  He has to deal with his
two granddaughters' needs and erupting hormones, he is forced to pick up
his daughter-in-law in Orlando who is strung out on drugs and take care
of her, and he is faced with a challenging task: unsettled business his
son, who is now in prison, has left behind.
He finds his daughter-in-law, Helen, with the two men his son robbed a
bank with.  She has apparently told these two men that the money that
resulted from the robbery is with her husband.  That is why he got
caught- the police found him with the money.  Now the two men are
demanding they get the cash, or they will come after Ulee's two
granddaughters.  Ulee promises he will bring it to them and takes a
deranged Helen back to his serene little home where her two children
that she abandoned scrutinize her with contempt.
Ulee is a man who lost his pals in war- he was the only man in his
platoon to survive.  He refuses help from anybody and does not respond
to affectionate gestures.  He is a bitter, closed-off man whose only
passion is his beekeeping, his granddaughters, and his dead wife.
Connie, his next door neighbor, finally gets through to him with
friendly favors.  She is a nurse and helps Helen get through her turmoil
with drugs.
Ulee's Gold is the story of a man who believes he is fine as he is-
until the truth is revealed painfully to him: He is cold and unfeeling.
Of course, in the end, Ulee softens up, but his journey is absorbing and
we have fallen in love with his tiredness and weariness.  What is
admirable about the movie is Peter Fonda's winning turn as Ulee and the
story that feels like Nobody's Fool but, in the end, ends up in a class
of its own.

Title
Review for Sleepless in Seattle (1993)
We have seen this scenario before- several times, actually, but we never
tire of it.  The "destiny" element in a romantic movie, that
they-were-meant-for-each-other feeling, the giddiness.  Sleepless in
Seattle will be called overrated because it feels familiar, but from the
familiarity, director-writer Nora Ephron pulls in a nearly extinct
gadget called satire.  Sleepless in Seattle, at heart, is not meant as a
satirical look at the 50s romances, but as something sentimentalists can
get "high" on, something cynics will soften up to.  It's sheer fun that
doesn't require much intelligence, but a good amount of subdued zeal.
The two main characters are played by Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan.  They're
performances are reserved, which fits the movie well- it, too, is a
quiet, light experience.  Sam, the Hanks character, is a man who has
just become a widower.  He is left to be a single-parent for his young
boy and is fed up with people trying to soothe him with "work will get
you through this" comments.  He moves to Seattle.  Annie Reed, played by
Ryan, lives cross-country in Baltimore, where she is engaged to a drab,
low-key guy named Walter (Bill Pullman) who is allergic to nearly
everything.  She doesn't indulge in dreamy, romantic fantasies- she is
extremely down-to-earth, a woman afraid of flying.
Back in Seattle, Sam's son Jonah discreetly calls a radio psychologist
to report that his father is "Sleepless in Seattle," an insomniac who
cannot grasp the reality of his wife's death.  Sam is literally forced
out to pour his heart and soul onto the telephone, onto radio, where
millions of listeners tune into this heartfelt sobstory of love lost.
Annie Reed hears this in Baltimore and falls in love with Sam at first
listen.  She is in tears by the end of his "our-love-was-magic" speech
and is convinced Sam is her destiny, her fated true love.
This from a woman who, in the beginning, said "Destiny is something
we've invented because we can't stand the fact that everything that
happens is accidental."  Now, she is willing to drop the Walter dweeb
for this sweet, charismatic voice to whom she has no idea it belongs.
She asks her brother (David Hyde-Pierce) if this is just pre-wedding
jitters and he replies "Yes".  She is extremely confused.  She knows
she's not the only one pursuing this dream guy "Sleepless in Seattle"
but she feels something in her gut- telling her "if you don't find this
guy, your destiny will not have been fulfilled".
Meanwhile, Jonah gets a letter from Annie and he, too, is convinced this
is the gal for his dad.  Sam, who already has a ditzy girlfriend,
dismisses the letter which says they should meet atop the Empire State
Building.  "Hah," he scoffs.  Jonah is concocting plan after plan
because he instinctively knows this is his destined stepmother.  Annie
is full of itching curiosity- who is this "Sleepless in Seattle" guy, he
sounds like a dream, he is my destiny!
The film continually alludes to the Cary Grant sobfest An Affair to
Remember, from which it steals from frequently.  That's the satire part,
but it's satire done in a care-free way.  The cynics have said the movie
can't stand on its own, that its too loaded with false romance.  It is
false romance, borrowed from old 50s movies.  We, the audience, don't
actually believe this is real because we know life just isn't that
coincidental.  We would love life to be this way and some of us do
believe in destiny (myself nearly included).  Sleepless is rather
manipulative like An Affair to Remember, but it's the kind of
manipulation we don't mind- we were manipulated in Terms of Endearment
and did we mind (I loved it.)
Although the movie has its elements of satire, it is basically a
(highly) pleasurable romantic-comedy that doesn't let explosive,
extremely funny humor get in the way of its dreamy, surrealistic
love-destiny story.  How do these cynics live?  How can they resist this
piece of tempting amour?  It's the movies that try too hard that usually
fail.  Sleepless doesn't push us, it seduces us with its romantic
fantasy and we are seduced. Sleepless in Seattle is a very delicious
movie and those who dismiss it just don't get the point.

Title
Review for Rebel Without a Cause (1955)
When Rebel Without a Cause was released, it was a novelty.  It was one
of the very first mainstream films to depict the turmoil of
adolescence.  Prior to this movie, Hollywood avoided any difficult
themes and every family on screen was a template for the perfect, happy
American family.  The families in Rebel Without a Cause are not
perfect.  They all have their missteps.  I don't believe there is one
family in America that is as superficial and completely joyful as the
Brady Bunch and Rebel brings to light the tortures of parenthood and,
primarily, the tortures of youth.
Jim Stark (James Dean) is a teenager whose parents have moved around so
much just so he will get a chance to make good friends.  His parents are
good and affectionate and nurturing but they just don't understand him.
I suppose that it is difficult for any parent to understand the struggle
of a teenager because they have already passed that awful stage in life
and probably can't or don't want to recall it.  Jim's family is devoted
to him; they buy him whatever he desires but, as any teenager knows,
material things can never fill the sense of emptiness and frustration
that comes with the age.
We first meet Jim at the town's police station.  He has just been caught
drunk on the streets.  Rebel Without a Cause is not a spectacular
movie.  It is the power of several scenes that make the movie so good.
The first sequence is one such powerful moment.  When Jim's parents come
to pick him up at the station, his father comforts him, his mother
chides him, and his grandmother is a bit cold towards him.  He yells,
"You're tearing me apart!" and has a private talk with an officer at the
station who asks Jim to visit him if he feels the urge to do something
wrong again.  I think the brilliance of this scene lies in how honest it
is.  It doesn't sugarcoat as many movies do and it doesn't make the
teenage situation so extreme.  Though the dialogue seems a tad banal, it
brings to the surface wounding issues that plague my age group.
What struck me initially about this scene was when Jim tells the officer
the weaknesses of his father, who always allows his mother to mock and
step on him.  Later in the sequence we meet Judy (Natalie Wood) who was
found walking the streets alone at night.  She too is a teenager and
suffers from conflicts with her father.  He calls her a tramp and she
believes he hates her.  Teenagers take everything to heart and calling
your children ugly names will inevitably have an effect on them.  She,
like Jim, does not come from an indifferent family.  Her parents know
that adolescence is a painful stage but they have no idea how to help
her.
At school, Jim meets Judy and her gang friends.  They tease him with a
switchblade fight and invite him to a gathering that night on a
dangerous cliff.  Another thing that struck me about the character Jim
is that he doesn't want to get involved in trouble but he wants to prove
himself to his violent peers.  He accepts the invitation but later asks
his father what to do.  When his father has no answer, he turns angry.
What follows is the famous scene near the cliff in which the gang leader
and Jim measure who is more cowardly by seeing who will jump out of
their car first as it nears the edge of the cliff.  The gang leader is
killed.
Jim meets Plato (Sal Mineo), a social misfit who comes from a broken
family, and begins a strong friendship with him.  With Judy, whose
involvement in the gang is, of course, but a facade, Jim begins a
romance.  These three characters are lonely and without friends and they
create their own little world by caring for each other.  The climactic
sequence is both painful and saddening.
Rebel Without a Cause has been said to be about juvenile delinquency and
what spawns it, but, to me, it has never had anything to do with that
subject.  For me, it's always been about what troubles teenagers the
most: family, frustration, isolation, and the certain urge to prove
something.  James Dean, in his acclaimed debut, has been dubbed a Marlon
Brando for youth.  His performance as Jim Stark is splintering and so
sensitive.  He is not macho at all but he reflects what is nearly always
behind the tough exterior of young men.  Despite his tragic death two
movies later, he remains very much alive in our culture, an epitome of
anguish-ridden youth.  His image and his red jacket have become the
symbols of the distressed youth cry. This is by far his best
performance.  Natalie Wood gives a good performance here but would top
herself in Elia Kazan's Splendor in the Grass, an equally moving film
about adolescents struggling with sexuality. Sal Mineo plays the timid
Plato and he gives a career-changing performance.
Some say Rebel Without a Cause's elements are dated and, yes, several
elements are.  However, Rebel makes itself not about issues that
tortured teens in the 50s, but about the central, inner, sometimes
self-inflicted pains that plagued teens then and still, to this day,
plague teenagers.  That is why I can relate to Rebel and why generations
of youth will.  Rebel Without a Cause is not a great movie, but parts of
it are simply brilliant.  It is still one of the best teenage movies
ever made, though segments of Truffaut's The 400 Blows and many scenes
featuring Timothy Hutton in Ordinary People moved me, too.  Rebel
Without a Cause will be relevant for as long as adolescence remains the
period of angst.

Title
Review for Sunset Blvd. (1950)
Sunset Boulevard
Directed by Billy Wilder
Starring Gloria Swanson, William Holden, Erich von Stroheim, Nancy Olsen
The set, the cinematography, the costumes, the performances, the score-
all of Sunset Boulevard's components give off a glowing, Gothic feel.
Billy Wilder's most intriguing film is not one of his timeless romances:
his rendezvous with Lemmon and Monroe, Lemmon and MacLaine, or Bogart
and Bacall- it is the ultra-sinister Gloria Swanson classic Sunset
Boulevard.  Gloria Swanson is eerie as Norma Desmond, a silent film star
who has faded into the background after the coming of the microphone.
She has a quality few actresses have anymore: a powerful, blatant dark,
mysterious, enigmatic quality about her that envelops her acting and
enhances and furthers its complexity and awe-inspiration.  She becomes
Norma Desmond and, looking back at Swanson's career, we can see she had
her share of hard times after the silent era ended, just like Desmond.
The difference between the two women- the performer and the character-
is that Gloria Swanson has been given a chance after her silent film era
stint and has given her best performance in a talking picture.  There is
no hope for the washed-up Norma Desmond.  She is focused on making
silent movies and has not moved with the times.  She is obsessed with
being the center of attention, of making her "return" (she hates the
word "comeback").  She is the scariest has-been ever put on screen.
The film starts with a film-noir-cynical style monologue by William
Holden's character Joe Gillis.  His career as a screenwriter is not
going very well at all.  His car is in jeopardy of being taken away- he
has not made any payments for months.  He is desperate- he has lost his
agent, his latest script has been turned down, and he has been receiving
harsh criticism.  All he has are B-movies under his name.  While being
chased by two men who are after his car, he pulls into the driveway of a
silent, old mansion on Sunset Boulevard.  He parks his car in the garage
to hide it.  He enters the home to realize it is Norma Desmond's.
"I know you.  You used to be in silent pictures.  You used to be big,"
he says to the dark, miserable old woman in sunglasses.  "I am big,"
Desmond insists, her head up high, "It's the pictures that got small!"
She is a woman so full of her own faded majesty and oversized ego, she
cannot face the facts or harsh criticism.
She hires Joe Gillis to edit a screenplay she has been working on for
years.  The movie, Solomi, will be her "return" and she has already set
high expectations- "It is to be a big picture.  I will have [Cecil B.]
DeMille direct it."  Gillis is full of skepticism and he moves in with
her, to his reluctance, because her script is too important to leave the
grounds.
The mansion creeps him out.  It is gloomy and is a shrine to its owner.
There are Norma Desmond photographs everywhere.  The butler, Max, plays
the ghostly organ every morning.  All the locks and doorknobs have been
cut out of the doors; it was suggested by Norma's doctor after she
attempted suicide.  She had been married three times.  Norma is very
protective of her "treasure" of a script, she refuses to take out excess
from it because she believes that her billions of fans "who have never
forgiven her for leaving the screen" will want to see more and more of
her.
Through the weeks, the relationship between Gillis and Desmond becomes
more than professional or platonic- it becomes dreadfully, slyly
romantic.  Gillis has no feelings for this shriveled up hag, but he is a
kept man.  She buys him everything under the sun- fur coats, gold
cigarette cases, watches.  He has feelings for his friend's fiancee,
Betty and we, the audience, know that such a beautiful romance between
Betty and Joe should be followed through.  Betty feels the same way
about him, but Joe's devotion to his best friend and his demanding
ultimatums at the Sunset Boulevard house get in the way.
Meanwhile, the Solomi script is sent to Paramount Pictures for Mr. Cecil
B. DeMille to read, but soon we discover he thought it was awful.  On
Desmond's trip to Paramount, she reminisces with old pals at the studio
and with Mr. DeMille, who doesn't have the heart to tell her he hated
the script for they worked together several times during the silent
era.  She leaves the studio thinking she will have a long career ahead
of her with DeMille, "The old team together again!"
I'm already beginning to give away the plot twists of the film which
make it incredibly fun and haunting from the opening credits to the
classic finale- "All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."
Sunset Boulevard has a classic negativism on Hollywood and the
fickleness of fans.  It is perfect- the acting by the cast is well-done,
at times flawless; the photographer creates a dark habitat for Norma
Desmond- a near-extinct animal, giving the film an exceedingly gloomy
feeling; the set is quite remarkable- the production designer has
created a memorable location for Norma Desmond to seduce her prey; the
score is sharp and staccato- murderous like Norma.  The film is
phenomenal really and it should be experienced as soon as possible.

Title
Review for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
Czech director Milos Forman, in 1984, made one of the most moving and
eerie films I've ever seen.  His Amadeus is theatrical, breathtaking,
and frightening in its emotional power.  How sad that he is remembered
most for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, a slightly good film that
became one of the only movies to win all five major Academy Awards and
boasted Jack Nicholson's trademark performance as Randle McMurphy.  To
be sure, Cuckoo's is quite an intense movie but the intensity seems to
disguise a rather flawed basis.
In this story of human bondage, tyranny, authority, and liberation,
McMurphy (Nicholson) is a man who has been jailed for "raping" a fifteen
("going on thirty")-year-old girl.  He commits crimes to get out of his
boring job, but he eventually gets sent to a mental institution for
allegedly being insane.  He is well aware that he is not crazy and the
head of the asylum is certain he isn't, too; nevertheless, he is kept in
the hospital for further observation.  During his prolonged stay, he
meets several colorful characters including Billy, a childish,
stuttering young man in perpetual fear of his mother (Brad Dourif);
Harding, an intellectual man unable to get over his wife's adultery
(William Redfield); Martini, a man of an infantile nature (Danny
DeVito); and Chief, a silent, tall figure who later becomes McMurphy's
greatest companion (Will Sampson).
McMurphy becomes acquainted with the head nurse at the hospital, Nurse
Ratched (Louise Fletcher), a seemingly heartless, cold, and insufferable
woman who casts a wicked spell of anxiety over the dependent patients at
the asylum.  Eager to annoy this strict authority, McMurphy encourages
the impressionable group of fellow madmen to rebel against her and the
hospital staff.  After trying so hard to get away from the real world,
McMurphy realizes how dangerous his new surroundings are to the human
spirit.  The staff are crooked, law-abiding, and merciless and only
inflict a sense of hopelessness and entrapment on the already weak
patients.
McMurphy, being sane, sees what is happening to these men.  They are
without any independence and are in a state of mental isolation.  Since
they have not been exposed to humanity and real life, they have become
useless in a world of stringent routines and life-abandoning
activities.  McMurphy learns that most patients at the institution are
not committed as he is and are free to come and go as they please.  They
don't leave, however, because they are too afraid of the real world.
McMurphy raises hell and is convinced he must not be pulled by the
current of brainwashing that has become the seeming sole priority of the
hospital.  The doctors and staff may have good intentions, but their
methods of "curing" the mentally ill are dangerous and emotionally
lethal.  Many patients, including McMurphy, are being worked on with
electric shock procedures.
(*Spoilers ahead, do not read further if you have not seen the film*)
Eventually, the voice of the enigmatic character, Chief, emerges.  First
thought to be deaf and dumb, Chief forges a strong friendship with
McMurphy and both share the same dream of escaping the hospital.
One night, McMurphy summons two lady friends from the real world, asks
them to bring booze to the asylum, and all the patients get drunk and
have a party.  Billy, in particular, undergoes a metamorphosis during
this pivotal night in the men's lives.  Once a stuttering, mentally
immature character, Billy loses his virginity and gains confidence
during the party, only to have it snatched from him by Nurse Ratched
when she returns the next morning and threatens to tell his mother about
what went on the preceding night.  Billy, tragically, commits suicide.
This and the final sequence are the most intense and bleak moments of
the film.  They ring true, though, and are not overly extreme like much
of the rest of the film.
In the final sequence, Chief is ready to escape the hospital with
McMurphy, but his plans are ruined when he discovers McMurphy has
finally been ruined by the electric-shock experiments performed on him
by the doctors.  In one of the most heartbreaking moments of the film,
Chief hugs his friend and mercifully smothers and kills him, saving him
from the joyless life inside the walls of the hospital.  The dismal mood
of that scene is replaced with the triumph of Chief, who becomes the
focal point of the story at the end.  He follows through with the
inspiring encouragement of McMurphy and escapes the institution.
What is pitiful about One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest is not these
scenes, which are memorable and not without their emotional pull.
Rather it is the repetitiveness of the rest of the story, which circles
aimlessly for more than two hours.  Instead of confronting the moral at
hand, Cuckoo's beats around the bush, diluting the power of the film's
message.  The atrocities of the hospital are accented while the truth of
the movie is allowed to fade into the background.
Aside from these criticisms, the performances are observant and, at
times, masterful.  Louise Fletcher is subtly cruel as Nurse Ratched.
Her performance is almost perfect.  Jack Nicholson, in a legendary
portrayal, is also worthy of attention and accolades.  He makes a great,
havoc-brewing hero.  Brad Dourif and Will Sampson also give poignant and
noteworthy turns.
However, this fails to compensate for the lack of enticing material in
the movie.  The horrors of the hospital are attention-grabbing, but are
of little interest to me in the muddle of a movie One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest is.  The movie is inconsistent: shifting from being
tedious to being very effective.  It is dark, moody, but only partially
successful.  With all the respect this movie has garnered from audiences
these past two decades, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest came across to
me as trying desperately to extract profundity out of outrageousness
and, in my eyes, it fails.

Title
Review for Graduate, The (1967)
B+
Benjamin Braddock (Dustin Hoffman) is in between the realms of the
sheltered life and reality.  He has just graduated from a prestigious
Ivy League university and his parents are throwing a party for him
downstairs and have invited all their wealthy friends.  Most of the
guests have known Benjamin since he was born and all of them are proud
of his outstanding achievement at the school.  Yet, he sits hiding in
his room with his fishes, worried sick about his uncertain future.
He finally consents to go downstairs and greet those at the party.
Everyone congratulates him and he smiles cordially.  One of the guests
takes him aside and tells him one word: "Plastics."  The man promises
Ben that it is a promising and flourishing industry and urges him to
consider working for such a company.  Ben escapes to his room upstairs.
Enter Mrs. Robinson (Anne Bancroft) and so begins perhaps the
quintessential American sex farce, The Graduate.  The movie is subtle
hilarity and sarcastic confusion.  Mrs. Robinson practically forces Ben
to take her home because her husband has supposedly left with the car.
She commands him to come with her inside because she is too afraid to
come into a dark house alone.  She forces alcohol upon him.  She puts on
some music and she asks, "What do you think of me?"  It is obvious this
is a seduction.
After much beating around the bush, she removes her clothes and bluntly
tells Ben that if he is ever in need of some gratification, she will be
more than happy to provide it.  This is after she vows to Ben she is not
flirting with him.  Obviously Ben is frightened by this woman.  He flees
the house but, strangely enough, calls her at a hotel and asks for her
company.  He is reluctant to give away his morals and virginity to this
sexy woman who is twice his age.  She toys with him and he snaps and
gives in to her temptation.  They have an affair.
I am not a big Dustin Hoffman fan but his character, Ben, is painfully
delightful.  Trying to cope with his newfound adulthood, he has a fling
with his father's partner's wife and then falls in love with her
daughter, Elaine (Katharine Ross).  Anne Bancroft is sly, shrewd, sexy,
scary, and fun and her Mrs. Robinson becomes the Dark Force of the
film.  She is the barrier between Ben and Elaine.  There is a tad bit of
vulnerability to her in earlier scenes in which she tells Ben of her
failed marriage, her lack of interest in life, and her loneliness but
the film turns on her and makes her a delectable villain.
By the end, I got the notion that this was a simple conventional love
story made unconventional by all the sexual comedy.  I think that is
what The Graduate is.  It is no masterpiece but it certainly is a heck
of a film.  The sardonic sexual coloring of the film seems to overshadow
the bare love story, making the film definitely not about love but a
combination of sexual satire and the corny desires for freedom.
Simon & Garfunkel's score fills The Graduate with a gloominess and
somber quality.  "Sounds of Silence," "Scarborough Fair," and "Mrs.
Robinson" are great songs and while, inside the movie they sound a bit
like elevator music, they do add a sort of quiet in an otherwise pungent
movie.
This was the motion picture breakthrough for Dustin Hoffman, Katharine
Ross, and the amazing director Mike Nichols.  The Graduate has a
late-60s atmosphere aided but exceptional cinematography, appealing and
creative editing, and a point-of-view style at the beginning of the
movie.  The Graduate is not a very practical movie, especially when
dealing with the Ben-Elaine love story.  Elaine seems to be
unrealistically forgiving.  The movie also forgives Ben for wrongly
having an affair with Mrs. Robinson- as if Mrs. Robinson were the only
contributor to their sin.  But that seems to be beside the point by the
end because The Graduate, after subsequent viewings, seems to be more of
a cartoon than anything else and its satirical take on its subject is
both enjoyable and, at times, astounding.

Title
Review for Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1966)
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?
directed by Mike Nichols
starring Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, George Segal, Sandy Dennis
Rated R for language and mature themes
In the 1960's, many changes occurred in cinema.  One of them was the
burial of the Production Code.  Once, films were limited by censors who
believed in the well-being of audiences, but now, almost anything can be
said in a movie.  Midnight Cowboy audaciously went beyond the adult
content norm, as did Easy Rider, the story of drug-wielders.  Who's
Afraid of Virginia Woolf, from the controversial play, went through
censorship hell before Jack Warner decided he would be true to the
play's essence and keep the phrases "h**p the hostess" and "scr**" in
the film.  Mike Nichols and the cast quartet comprised of Elizabeth
Taylor, Richard Burton, George Segal, and Sandy Dennis create an eerie,
surrealistic film, bitter and dark.
Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton were then at the center of a
tipsy-turvy marriage and some say the two, who play an unhappily married
couple in the film, didn't have to act much.  I'm sure Taylor's and
Burton's rocky marriage contributed to the utterly choking atmosphere
between the two in the film, and the resulting performances are
absolutely riveting.  In the tradition of A Streetcar Named Desire,
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? was a Broadway play before it was made
into a movie.  It also has a dark, shaking atmosphere like Streetcar and
it also only has four principle actors.
The couple- George and Martha- in the movie is so dysfunctional.
Elizabeth Taylor as Martha, in one of the funnier moments in the movie,
screams at George (Burton) for not knowing which film the line "What a
DUMP!" is from.  "You're so stupid," she quips, "it's some damned Bette
Davis Warner Bros. epic!"  The movie begins when George and Martha are
returning home, under a moonlit sky, from one of Martha's father's
parties.  George is a college professor and Martha's father is the
college president.  At home, Martha screams and bickers at the weary
George and announces, to his surprise, they are having guests.  "At this
time of the night?!" George yells.
The guests, Honey and Nick, are flawlessly played by Sandy Dennis and
George Segal, and they are new in town.  Nick is a professor in biology
at the college.  The night starts out with few words (they have nothing
to say to each other) and then dips into a nightmare of wicked
flirtation (between Martha and Nick), bitter mockery (between Martha and
George), flowing alcohol, long-kept secrets, and ghoulish games.  Honey
and Nick are surprised at the ceaseless stream of insults the elderly,
middle-aged couple throw at each other and they become ill-at-ease.
They are trapped, however, in Martha and George's web of deceitful and
frightening games.   Honey, a frail woman, becomes sick after one of the
most potent scenes in the film:
"So here I am with this FLOP, this BOG!" Martha screams, pointing at
George.  Martha is playing a game with him- to see what will make him
snap.  He does, breaking a glass bottle on the bar and, to drain out the
noise of Martha's voice, sings loudly "Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf"
while dancing and twirling with the very drunk Honey.
The film is basically in three acts- the first one just mentioned, the
second one where more games are played at an empty dancing club, and the
huge finale involving Martha and George's marriage-long illusion of a
son.  We have learned that both couples have an inability to reproduce-
Martha has created the image of a son in her mind, she has kept up with
this game throughout her failed marriage.  Nick is impotent and Honey is
frightened of childbirth.
Haskell Wexler's phenomenal black-and-white cinematography only
heightens the emotions on this non-stop two-hour roller coaster.  He
uses a hand-held camera much of the time and telling close-ups.  He uses
shadows, creating a dream-like state for some of the reality-fantasy
sequences.  The shakiness of his camera makes us feel we are looking
through the eyes of the four characters as they go through this inferno,
this earthquake of a night which begins after midnight and ends at dawn.
The performances are very smart and well-done, especially the two
leads'.  Elizabeth Taylor, in her finest performance, her Hamlet, gained
twenty pounds to play Martha alongside her-then husband Richard Burton.
She is flaming, red-hot madness: loving George one minute, and pounding
him the next.  She has so many memorable scenes and never have I seen
such a raging performance from her.  Richard Burton is not to be
outdone- he has quiet moments in the film which are his best.  His
character, George, has a softness that Martha tries to take advantage of
and make fun of.  George Segal is very good as Nick, the perplexed,
naďve new professor and Sandy Dennis goes from soft-spoken to a loud
drunk in the film and it is absolutely fascinating.
Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? could almost be called a war film.  It
has the psychological twists and turns of Streetcar but, here, it seems
Elizabeth Taylor is the barbaric Marlon Brando and Richard Burton is the
timid, ruined Vivien Leigh.  The film has been called a black comedy,
and though so many scenes scream a humorous irony and preposterousness,
there isn't much that is funny about this difficult drama.   Mike
Nichols is like Elia Kazan here, pulling out every ounce of emotion from
his actors.  The anger of the film is unsettling and depressing, like
Streetcar's, and the movie feels stagy during many parts of the film.
But I have never been moved more by Mr. Nichols, nor have I seen such a
well-put-together cast for a long time.

Title
Review for Born on the Fourth of July (1989)
Born on the Fourth of July
Directed by Oliver Stone
Starring Tom Cruise, Kyra Sedgewick, Willem Dafoe
USA, 1989
Rated R (realistic war violence, sex, and strong pervasive language)
The protagonist of Oliver Stone's biopic Born on the Fourth of July is
Ron Kovic, a man disillusioned by dreams of heroism, maimed at war, and
determined at making something of himself after part of him is lost
forever.  The movie has faults- it sometimes loses sight of what it
wants the audience to feel- but it is a strong film nonetheless: more
profound than Stone's earlier Vietnam epic Platoon and focused more on
one person than the other film, which is vaster.  However, despite what
you may have heard about Tom Cruise's performance, it is not an
improvement from his Rain Man-Top Gun shtick.  His is not bad acting in
this film, but it's nothing special- it's low on the depth and heavy on
false emotion.  (His first piece of great acting was in Jerry Maguire,
seven years later.)
Born on the Fourth of July follows Ron Kovic on his journey to
realization- the realization of the horrors of war.  As a kid, he is
fascinated with war and fighting and heroism and as a teenager, he feels
a need to be "somebody", a hero, a "man".  Tom Berenger plays a
stoneish, firm Marine corps recruiter who tries to convince Ron's high
school's men to be masculine and join the Marines- go to war,
basically.  For Ron, it is the final push that determines his destiny-
he will join the Marines, go to war and be a celebrated veteran.  He has
no idea what the Vietnam War is about, he doesn't want to experience the
violence of it, but he wants to be a "man" and he wants to prove
himself.  His parents encourage him to go but we see that he is still
looking for the right direction.  He is sure he wants to join the
Marines, yet he is doubtful of what it will bring him.  He prays to God
to show him the right way.
When he goes to Vietnam, he is immediately faced with an attack.  He
mistakenly attacks the homes of women and children and he accidentally,
in the bitter confusion of it all, kills a young man on his side.  Then,
he is shot in the leg.  Is this the price you have to pay for heroism?
He is now regretful that he ever decided to go to war.  He is crammed
into a rat-infested, non-hygienic hospital where he is mutilated,
becomes paralyzed, and is put in a wheelchair.  Oliver Stone spares us
nothing in his images of the hospital.  It is a disgusting place to be,
the pinnacle of filth.  It made me cringe.  All the while, Ron Kovic is
desperately trying to piece it all together- he's gone to war, he's lost
his manhood and the ability to walk, he is filthy and sweating, and no
one recognizes that he is the "hero" that he is.  What's the payoff?
When he returns home to his parents' house, everyone looks at him with
"I'm so sorry" looks and everyone speaks in "I'm so sorry" tones.  This
is not what he wanted.  He wanted his parents to hold him up like a
trophy, he wanted people to recognize what he did for his country.
Instead, he gets a bathroom specially designed for his disability.
There are now hippie anti-war activists around.  Ron believes what he
did was good and that it proves he loves his country.  He condemns the
activists, saying they can "love [their country] or leave it."  He wants
to justify the pain of the war by upholding it.  He still doesn't even
know what  it was all about.  He still carries the wait of the guilt of
killing the Vietnamese women and babies and a man on his platoon.
Ron's high school sweetheart (Kyra Sedgewick) is one of the many
activists and she tries to convince him that war is no good. He begins
to believe her.  He goes on vacation in Mexico where he fools around
with prostitutes to fulfill his emptiness.  Since the war, he has
changed.  He doesn't know what he wants- he knows it was his decision to
go to war, but he is thirsty for honor, fame, and recognition.  The
film's aim is often blurry at this point.  We realize that it wants a
lot from us: first it wants us to cheer for Ron who is pursuing his
dreams and going to war, then it asks us to feel sorry for him because
of all the harm war did to him- it also asks us to stand by Ron's
conviction that war is honorable, then it asks us to hate war.
Ron begins to hate war and join political rallies against the Vietnam
War.  First, we feel he is doing it out of compassion for the young,
disillusioned men suffering in Vietnam as he did, but then we realize
his motives are selfish.  He wants to scream to the country, "This is
what happened to me!  Feel sorry for me! Love me!  Give me heroism!"  He
longs to fill his void with something important like these rallies, but
what he says seems to be more of self-pitying talk like "This is what
happened to me!  I had to suffer!"
Tom Cruise's performance is often flat and emotionless.  He seems to
think a great performance lies in amazing, loud outbursts complete with
screaming and swearing.  There have been many great performances that
have indulged in such sequences- his sinks its teeth into fights with
activists, politicians, and his family but it all seems so passionless,
self-indulgent, and almost like showing-off.  Cruise seems to be holding
a contest of who can shout the loudest- if so, he'd probably win.  There
are some good moments but it isn't a really well worked-out performance.
Apart from the flaws, there is the masterful John Williams score, the
interesting, dull-colored photography of Robert Richardson, and a good
story.  The motives are sometimes shifty and the ending is vague but the
movie is like all good anti-war films- showing a man ruined by war and
trying to get back on his feet.

Title
Review for Network (1976)
A-
The television industry is a vicious world of circling sharks, a world
of death, violence, sex, manipulation, cynicism, and spite.  Paddy
Chayefsky's dark exposé of this industry, Network, is savage, hilarious,
and strangely powerful.  From it has come the famous cry, "I'm mad as
hell and I'm not going to take this anymore," screamed live on air by
Peter Finch's final character, the depressed and degraded
ex-anchor-gone-mad Howard Beale.  Chayefsky and one of the great
American directors, Sidney Lumet, show us a plethora of venomous and
interesting characters in a film that dares to explore not only the
corruption of electronic journalism, TV execs, and machinery, but also
the corruption of a generation polluted by the god-like, morbid minds on
screen.
Howard Beale (Finch) has just been fired from his anchoring job on the
struggling network UBS.  On the air, he refuses to go out without a
bang.  He announces he will commit suicide on television, for all to
see, and jokes about how this outburst will surely buoy the current, low
ratings of the news show.  Of course, the public and press react.
Everyone is either outraged or enlightened.  This may have been the
first time an anchor has shown his true, humanistic colors on the tube.
The public is interested.
On the next night, executives agree to keep Howard Beale on the show for
one day.  They expect him to apologize for his emotional eruption.  He
doesn't, though.  On UBS news that night, Beale decides to segue into a
tell-all, pessimistic tale of corruption and hypocrisy in our society.
He also uses the "Bs" word.  UBS News has sky-rocketed up the Nielsen
Ratings and, though it is clear to his friends (William Holden) that he
has lost his mind, the station keeps him as an anchor to better their
ratings.  The audience seems to be responding to Beale's seemingly
biblical proclamations because they seem so true.  Everyone has become
tired of happiness and people are willing to listen to the empowering
mockery of American culture Howard Beale and UBS News are providing.
One night, Beale, wet from the outside rain and in his raincoat and
pajamas, begins ranting his apocalyptic and trademark angst shout on TV,
"I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take this anymore!"  He urges his
viewers to get up from their chairs and go to the window.  He tells them
it is no use to change things when you're not as "mad as hell."  "You
have to get really angry first," he advises.  That night, the whole
nation screamed from their windows the furious cry of Howard Beale.
Faye Dunaway is Diana Christensen, the sexy and driven programmer of the
new Howard Beale show, a wrath-ridden, daily showcase of Beale's
newfound philosophies.  Max Schumacher (Holden), the original news
programmer, is fired because of his concern for his insane friend.
Diana and Frank Hackett (Robert Duvall), the power-hungry executive,
milk Beale of all he can offer and use him like a dog.  Beale has
commanded an entire culture to tune in every night and watch him
screaming about "truthful" issues.  He has reached the heights of an
American guru or idol.  He may even have replaced the role of God in
America.  He speaks of the illusion of power and the illusion of
television.  He is a good man who has exploded; he is sick and tired of
blood-thirsty hounds.
There is a very moving subplot in Network, one of infidelity that
involves Max, the middle-aged, helpless producer, and Diana, the
ruthless young programmer, in an affair.  We also see Beatrice Straight
in a very brief but brilliant performance as Max's wife.  We learn that,
beneath Diana's assured exterior, she is completely empty of human
emotion and is numbed to reality.  Max, who is going through a mid-life
crisis, gives a moving speech on his fear of death and how he used Diana
to rid this fear and, in turn, was used by her.  As a college student,
Diana had a great crush on Max when he gave a lecture at her university,
but now that her past infatuation has become a delusive relationship, we
realize that her exposure to the television culture has steered her life
in a superficial direction.  However, as Lumet pointed out in his great
book Making Movies, it is not the TV, a mere machine, that has corrupted
an entire generation and will corrupt many generations to come, but the
horrible minds on the screen that conquered the goodness of the people.
Diana is a woman who was raised on these corrupted minds and Max,
realizing this, flees the affair.
Network, with the guidance of Lumet and cinematographer Owen Roizman,
plunges us into an artificial world in which everything is based on the
dollar bill and the manipulation of a confused mass audience.  Not only
are the executives, programmers, and presidents of these stations at
fault for contaminating our souls, but we are as much at fault too, if
only because we have allowed ourselves to be persuaded by money-making
ideas that may seem novel at the time but, as Beale would say, are what
we could have find within ourselves.  No, Network is not a film of
immense, sappy coating.  It is brutally funny and relentlessly moving.
It gets its point across very well through its pungent darkness and
Chayefsky's amazing script.
The cast is heaven-sent.  Faye Dunaway is calculative and scheming and
she gives one of her best performances ever as Diana.  William Holden is
extremely impressive and affective as Max, giving probably the most
moving performance in the film.  Peter Finch won the Best Actor Oscar
posthumously for playing Howard Beale with the passion and anguish that
he did.  Beatrice Straight and Ned Beatty stand out in very small roles
with superbly written monologues.
Network, directed by the great man who brought us such masterpieces as
12 Angry Men and Dog Day Afternoon, is outrageous and campy.  The issues
of television corruption may be exaggerated (or may not be) but they are
not difficult to believe.  (*Spoiler*) When Howard Beale is killed at
the end for his show having network-threatening ratings, it is not
beyond belief.  A world of extortion and villainy is always capable of
stooping that low.  What Network may eventually make clear is that
people are able to go to such horrific, violent extremes for the simple
reason of money, but only when they have been hardened and made plastic
by the sinister coercion of illusions.

Title
Review for Sugarland Express, The (1974)
The Sugarland Express
directed by Steven Spielberg
starring Goldie Hawn, William Atherton, Michael Sacks
rated PG for violence and language
The Sugarland Express is part of a genre of film that includes Thelma
and Louise and Dog Day Afternoon- the
road-movie-cheer-for-the-celebrity-criminals type of film.  I would
imagine it would be hard to make this type of movie: first you have to
create characters charismatic enough for you to cheer for them, then you
have to find capable and charismatic actors to play the part, then you
have to please the audience with great, fun, mischievous doings
(performed by these characters), then you have to please the critics
with some "hidden" morality tale, some inkling of life that can be found
by analyze-to-the-core critics.  It's a lot to juggle.  The Sugarland
Express, Steven Spielberg's debut theatrical release, pulls it off,
probably not as successfully as Thelma or Dog Day, but in the end, we're
fanatically rooting for the criminal duo and hoping they get what they
seek.
The movie is based on a true Texas occurrence in 1969 and has an at
times saucy and at times dim-witted heroine, Lou Jean (Goldie Hawn), who
visits her husband, the quiet Clovis (William Atherton) at the prison
farm from where he is soon to be released.  Lou Jean is a woman with a
lot of nerve.  Their baby son has been taken away by the authorities-
the couple are petty thieves- and she asks, actually, she commands her
husband to break out of this almost pleasant prison to help her get
their Baby Langston back.  Clovis is in a state of perpetual fright of
his wife- what she says goes.  So, to get his son back and to please Lou
Jean, Clovis goes with her and gets a ride with an elderly couple who
have just visited their son at the prison.  When the elderly man is
pulled over for driving dangerously slow, Lou Jean takes control and
drives away with his car at high speed, summoning the attention of
throngs of police cars.  The movie becomes a car chase and after Lou
Jean crashes the car, she kidnaps a highway-patrol officer, Slide
(Michael Sacks), and the chase resumes.
The screen is bombarded with automobiles- trailers, cars, trucks.  Like
in Spielberg's previous assignment Duel, a made-for-TV movie, the cars
play a significant role - they are the setting.  I don't think there is
one scene after the chase begins where streams of cars aren't present on
the screen.  They shine in the bright sun, are crashing together, and
zooming fast on the crowded, cluttered roads.  Most of the time, Lou
Jean and Clovis are in Slide's police car.  He is, strangely, helping
them- touched by their persistence, perhaps.
Like Thelma and Louise, which is essentially a road movie, The Sugarland
Express is a red-orange experience.  Vilmos Zsigmond, the director of
photography, photographs sunsets and the cars shimmering in the
sunlight.  The film has a certain summer heat that comes off the screen
and builds the excitement as Lou Jean and Clovis make their way to
Sugarland, the town where Langston is living with adoptive parents.
An element seen in Dog Day Afternoon is seen here- Lou Jean and Clovis,
two criminals, are glorified and made celebrities by the public.  Just
like they did for Sonny in Dog Day, the crowds form and rally and
applaud this couple who plan to get their kid back.  The crowds bring
gifts, flags, money.  They surround the police cars until they almost
make a lake of people, until they make the cars into boats crossing this
sea of humanity.  Lou Jean welcomes this popularity and fame with open
arms.  She loves it.  She loves the presents, she loves the recognition,
she loves the attention.  The two men in the front seats roll their eyes
as she receives the gifts and listens to all the admiring and supportive
talk from strangers.
All the while, police cars are following the couple into the horizon.
The Sugarland Express is full of twisting excitement and pleasure, the
pleasure that I felt lacked in the dry husk of a movie sensation known
as Jaws.  The editing is a bit uneven, making the first half of the
movie at times dry and too quick or too slow, but that diminishes in the
light of the almost satiric comedy in which the movie lives. The
Sugarland Express doesn't even have a morality tale, really, and the
critics ate it up, as did I.

Title
Review for Citizen Kane (1941)
How do you tell the story of such a legendary film?  Citizen Kane is not
only a powerful film, but a revolutionary one- every single movie made
today has at least some of Kane manifested in it.  This evocative motion
picture changed the way filmmakers made their films.  It is, of course,
a masterpiece of storytelling- it is nearly essential for film students
to watch.  Every second has become a classic and it has been lauded as
the greatest motion picture ever made.  Is that true?  Who knows, but it
certainly is the most studied and probably alongside The Birth of a
Nation as the most technically and structurally important picture of all
time.
Orson Welles, then 25, was given full control by RKO Radio Pictures to
make any film he so desired.  Welles, an exceptionally intelligent man,
brought along for this project his Mercury stage actors whom he had
worked with in radio and theater, and co-wrote the Oscar-winning
screenplay with the seasoned Herman J. Mankiewicz.  The resulting film
was highly controversial- it was said to poke fun at mogul William
Randolph Hearst.  The film went through hellfire to get released and
when it finally was, was ignored by the public and critics alike.  This
controversy should make Kane's being snubbed at the Academy Awards much
more understandable.  Oscar rarely succumbs to the pleasures of films
with ingenuity.
In all this hoopla about its technique, the film's story seems to have
diminished.  Citizen Kane has an extremely powerful tale to tell- it is
a story of greed, unhappiness, and the pursuit of love.  The title
character is a lonely, financially thriving man named Charles Foster
Kane.  As a young child, he was taken away by a rich man named
Thatcher.  That arrangement helped his parents in their financial woe.
Charles was promised a huge inheritance, but what he wanted was a
newspaper to run.  Kane, while still quite young, ran the flourishing
Inquirer newspaper and transformed it into a powerful empire.  He
dabbled into politics, and everything else he could get his hands on.
He had many friends, but his inability to love and his thirst for love
didn't balance out.
This disability was his downfall.  The film shows how cold Kane was
through the distance between characters.  There is a very famous montage
in the film in which Kane's first wife start out as a happy newlywed
couple sitting close together at their breakfast table and then, with
time, grow apart which is shown by the characters sitting further
apart.  At the  end of the sequence, the table seems longer than when
the montage started out and, instead of sitting on the same side, hand
in hand, Kane is sitting at one end of the long table while his wife
sits on the other end.
Kane divorced his first wife after he is seen with a mistress, which
caused scandal, thereby smashing his chances of being elected as
governor.  His mistress, an aspiring singer, later marries him, but to
her, he also cannot express love.  He buys her everything under the sun,
but, as she illustrates in an emotional monologue, it isn't what she
wants.  Kane builds an opera house for his second wife and, despite her
wilted voice, pays impatient music teachers to train her.  Her debut
opera is unsuccessful, a flop.  A memorable image during this chapter in
the film is one where Kane's wife is belting her song on stage and the
camera moves up to reveal two men on the balcony holding their noses,
hating the music.  Charles Kane is a driven man and will not be made a
fool of- after scathing reviews, he continues to force his wife to
sing.  Later, at their house in Xanadu, a monument Kane has built for
himself, Orson Welles uses the distance technique to full effect,
showing the bored wife far away from her egotistical husband in a room.
Citizen Kane is not told the way most films before it were.  Kane begins
with the famous dying sequence and with a newsreel, putting Kane's life
in a nutshell, explaining the impact he had on people.  Then, the film
goes into detail, drawing on diaries and interviews with people Kane
knew.  All this investigation of Kane's life is aiming to find the
meaning of his last word- "Rosebud".  However, that's just a prank to
draw the audience in, the film is not about Rosebud so much as it is
about the man who uttered the word.  When Mr. Berstein, one of the
interviewees, is asked about the word, he gives one of the best speeches
ever committed to film-
 "A fellow will remember a lot of things you wouldn't think he'd
remember. You
take me. One day, back in 1896, I was crossing over to Jersey on the
ferry,
and as we pulled out, there was another ferry pulling in, and on it
there was a
girl waiting to get off. A white dress she had on. She was carrying a
white
parasol. I only saw her for one second. She didn't see me at all, but
I'll bet a
month hasn't gone by since, that I haven't thought of that girl."
Citizen Kane is a maze of an enigma's life.  Those closest to him talk
about him, his ambition, and his ruin.  Gregg Toland's revolutionary
deep-focus cinematography is extremely compelling.  In the first
sequence, the dying sequence, Kane murmurs "Rosebud" on his deathbed and
drops a glass, ball paperweight.  It shatters on the floor and we see,
through the broken pieces of glass, a nurse come into the room.  The
film is a collection of sharp and distorted images- one of my favorite
uses of light in the movie is when the reporter investigating "Rosebud"
visits the library of Kane's guardian Thatcher and is sent to a room to
read Thatcher's diary.  A ray of brilliant light falls into the darkness
of the room.  Toland shot several scenes from the floor looking up which
caused quite a stir.  In older films, you almost never see the ceilings
of buildings because that was where the lights and microphones were.
Here, you see ceilings made of cloth which look real, but behind them
Toland and Welles put the microphones.  Citizen Kane is probably the
greatest work of photography ever seen on screen, most definitely the
best use of the camera in a black-and-white film.
There are several images in the film that stick in one's mind forever.
There is a scene where the old and defeated Kane walks past many
mirrors, spawning infinite reflections.  There is, of course, the scene
where the sleigh with the word Rosebud on it is thrown in the furnace
with all the rest of Kane's other stuff that is being burned after his
death.  The flames curl around the sleigh, the word Rosebud darkening
and vanishing.  The images of Kane's monumental home Xanadu and Kane at
a political rally are astonishing.
Citizen Kane is not filled with a lot of emotion and maybe that's why
some people don't respond to it.  It is a massive achievement, the first
and last famous directorial achievement of an infinitely talented man,
Orson Welles.  Can you believe people actually wanted to colorize this
film?  Watching it in a colored version would be as blasphemous as
watching the deliberately black-and-white Schindler's List in color.  It
would be a sin, a crying shame just as it is to watch the power and
enigmatic quality of Casablanca leeched out in badly colorized
versions.  What Citizen Kane has brought to the art of film is great- a
different kind of narrative structure for films.  Kane's life was not a
straight-forward story but a winding, curving morality tale.  The
earlier use of linear storytelling in films would have done the story
little justice.  Citizen Kane is one of those lasting achievements, one
of those ageless films, and one of the most gratifying film experiences
ever.

Title
Review for Smoke (1995)
Smoke is a necklace of stories: each pearl different in its own way, but
all of them united by a string of thread.  Directed with a sedate
simplicity by The Joy Luck Club's Wayne Wang and written by novelist
Paul Auster, this motion picture is not exceptional, but it is
effective.  I would certainly recommend many titles over this small
Miramax film, but it is undeniable that there was much thought behind
its creation and the writer has woven philosophy into these Big Apple
tales.
The cast of acclaimed actors includes Harvey Keitel (who is always
interesting), William Hurt, Stockard Channing, Ashley Judd, and Forest
Whitaker.  Newcomer Harold Perrineau, Jr. joins the mix and together
Wang, Auster, and the cast tell these thoughtful, if not compelling,
stories to get across the simple message that People affect people.  The
thread that unites these stories is a small cigar shop owned by Auggie
Wren (Keitel), a man with a simple life, a few friends, and
philosophical "life" tidbits in his numerous stories.  His friend and
regular customer, a writer named Paul (Hurt) is one day affected by a
young man named Rashid (Perrineau) who saves his life near the cigar
shop.  Of course, Paul offers Rashid anything he wants in return for
saving his life.  Rashid decides on a lemonade, then on moving in with
Paul.  He has, we later learn, run away from his home from his aunt and
uncle to find his father who abandoned him years ago who someone has
seen alive.  He is also running away from the robbers who stole five
thousand dollars- the money which he now has.
Rashid finds who he believes to be his father- Cyrus, an owner of a
small town gas station who has a bitter past that has left him with a
fake arm.  While their relationship is on the verge of being discovered,
someone enters Auggie Wren's life.  It is his ex-girlfriend from several
years ago (Stockard Channing) who comes to the cigar shop claiming that
her daughter, Felicity, who may be his is strung out on drugs in the
projects with a moronic beast.  He is reluctant to believe her but does
not want to leave a girl who may be his daughter on drugs in the
projects with a freak boyfriend when he hears that she is pregnant.
Rashid's five thousand dollars will affect their lives.
As you can see, it is a tangled web of lost souls and wise men, all of
them with a story to tell.  They are, directly or indirectly, affected
by the other "pearls" on the string, most of the time by small details.
In a matter of seconds, Rashid walks into Paul's life.  The money from a
robbery is able to be put into good use.  Smoke is a portrait of the
difficulties and poignancy of life.
Here are the flaws: Smoke sometimes feels so contrived it doesn't seem
worth watching.  Whitaker's performance is frail- his scenes of
outbursts are so mechanical, so choreographed all the passion from them
are leeched out.  The entire cast doesn't show anything for the big
names it includes- most of the performances are acceptable, some have
many moments of tenderness and wisdom, but all of them lack the
"something" that makes you think - "Good acting!"  Ashley Judd's turn as
Felicity is short but has its emotionally-charged moments.  It is too
brief, though, and the character is too underdeveloped to regulate what
the film could have been- wonderful.
Smoke does have a very heartwarming ending, though.  It concludes this
melting pot of soap operas of a few New Yorkers.  The film has several
gems of pleasure hidden in its soft, gentle theme and watching it is not
painful or a waste of time.  Rachel Portman's score is put to good use,
as all of her great scores are, and creates a nice, simple atmosphere
for these simple tales.  What is wrong with Smoke is not its message,
but the fabricated way in which it is decorated.
