Authors
Andrew Kuchling
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for TV Dante: The Inferno Cantos I-VIII, A (1989) (TV)
     With every work I see, my opinion of Peter Greenaway rises.  As a
general rule, heavily "arty" films inspire me to seek out the filmmakers
and whack them with a rolled-up newspaper.  "Not Mozart" and "A TV
Dante" are the most strongly art-oriented films Greenaway has made, and
their testimony compels me to place Greenaway high among the best film
directors.
     The shorter piece first: "Not Mozart" was part of a project to
celebrate last year's bicentennial of Mozart's death.  Six film
directors and six modern composers collaborated to make celebratory
movies, about half an hour in length.  Greenaway's contribution, in
collaboration with jazz composer Louis Andreissen, is 30-odd minutes of
images.  The similarity to PROSPERO'S BOOKS is great (in both senses of
the word); the same video techniques used to generate the magical books
is used here throughout the film; image follows image.  My art
history-aware SO told me that throughout it she kept seeing
compositions, poses, tableaux, that she remembered.  She found it full
of resonances with various Renaissance paintings.  Me?  Sorry, I just do
physics.  The film has a spiderweb story.  It relates how the gods
constructed objects for each letter in the alphabet; when they came to
M, the middle letter, they decided to construct Man.  Man then had to be
taught Movement; once he knew Movement, what was to be done with him?
It was decided to teach him to make Music.  To paraphrase a caption,
having made Man and Music, it was found necessary to make Mozart.  This
summary sounds strange, but, it simply doesn't matter.  I can't describe
the flow of the film coherently; afterwards you're left with an idea of
the story and a welter of images, and a memory of having seen something
intricate and beautiful.
     Most of my comments above can be repeated for "A TV Dante".  Each
10-minute episode (made for Channel Four in Britain; why don't North
Americans get TV like this?) uses one canto from Dante's INFERNO; the
first 8 of the 34 cantos in the complete work are transformed into film.
This project was begun in 1989; originally all 34 cantos were supposed
to be completed by 1992.  Don't hold your breath waiting; I have heard
nothing further about them.  I suspect this project will never be
completed; Greenaway and Tom Philips, the co-director and translator,
may have lost interest, the actors may be unable to return to the
project, or maybe financial difficulties have killed the project.
Perhaps it's best to leave them unfinished; could the tone have been
maintained throughout?  It will always be a monument to artistic vision,
at any rate.
     With Tom Beck as Dante and Sir John Gielgud as Virgil, his guide to
Hell, the delivery of Philips' translation is impeccable.  The story is
told using head-and-shoulders shots of Gielgud and Beck, accompanied by
image superimposed on image, producing a kaleidoscopic effect.  There
are even footnotes; at certain more obscure references a small screen
pops up, and a historian or cosmologist or entomologist explains the
reference, sometimes adding an ironic touch to Dante's words.  This
produces the effect of TV hypertext, and helps keep everything
comprehensible, even if you've never read THE INFERNO.  Stock footage of
WWII and nuclear explosions, of leopards and births, is used throughout,
making the 13th Century work feel surprisingly modern.  Again, any
attempt to describe the rush of colour and shape is futile; this has to
be seen to be understood.
     Both these works contain no sex, no violence, but lots of nudity,
as you'd expect from Greenaway.  My SO stated that her opinion of
Greenaway increased vastly after seeing the films.  I also think these
will become my favorite Greenaway pieces after PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  I am
at a loss to explain why we both enjoyed them so much.  Perhaps it's
because we, being 20 and 19 years old, are strongly visually-oriented,
and found these visually stimulating videos agreed with our idea of what
television should be.  Is this literature for the Sesame Street
generation?
Note: I would be most interested to see if others found "Not Mozart" and
"A TV Dante" as hypnotically fascinating.  Especially, would older
viewers who have not been raised on TV find them interesting?  If you'd
like to comment, please e-mail me at the address below.  If there are
more than five responses, I'll summarize and post to rec.arts.movies.

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     My foremost memory from this movie: The batlike form of the Count
has vanished, and the vampire hunters tense, waiting for the next
onslaught.  Soon enough, it comes; suddenly a horrid mass appears, a
shape of grey covered with pinkish--what, exactly?  Tentacles?
Worms?  The form remains standing long enough for memories of all the
myriad revolting creatures of Lovecraft's Cthulhu mythos to come 
rushing back, and then it collapses into a squirming mound of rats
which run in all directions, seeking for escape and darkness in which
to pool their various fragments of Dracula's evil.
     Point:  Movies, like all works of art and literature, are distant
mirrors in which we see our own concerns reflected.  Thus, an
optimistic person tends to put the most positive highlight on things,
preferring to see reminders of good in the most depressing tragedy;
other people also impose their own interpretations upon the story.  But
in order for this to be possible, a movie must be complex enough,
loosely structured enough, to allow us flexibility in twisting its 
events to our point of view.  Simple movies one can forget five minutes
after walking out of the theater; intricate movies can be brooded over
for weeks and watched repeatedly, increasingly pleasurable with each
viewing.  
     In my pretentiously ornate style, the previous paragraph is
leading up to my opinion that DRACULA is one such wonderfully
multi-leveled movie.  Coppola has managed to evoke many memories
throughout the movie; it resonates exactly with my subconscious,
reminding me of H. P. Lovecraft and Conan Doyle, of paintings and myths
and dreams.  Don't take any of this to mean the storyline is hard to
follow; scriptwriter James V. Hart has done his job very well and kept
me fascinated throughout the film's course.  I recommend it highly,
and suggest you see it at once, for I'm not sure how well it will do
at the box office.  I don't think The Phantom would like it much, since
while there are a few truly frightening moments, there is no sustained
terror building toward a climax.  Indeed, Prince Vlad (as perfectly
played by Gary Oldman) doesn't seem very terrifying; you feel sorry for
him, stuck in an undead state he no longer desires, pining for a dead
love.  This is not a classical horror film; it feels more like a
Dickens Dracula, a story of character development.  
 
     This is also not the Bram Stoker novel, either in the fine details
of the plot or in the approach.  This is not a portrayal of real events;
it is emphatically a film, designed to tell a story while adding subtext
to it.  As a train carrying Jonathan Harker passes through the
Carpathians, an eye appears in the sky to watch him.  Dracula's shadow
doesn't match the actions of his body, instead seeming to act out his
inner thoughts.  Scenes meld into one another;  dissolves leave just
enough overlap between transitions to blur the boundaries.  Humourous
juxtapositions are made, but you hate yourself for laughing when, just
after Lucy has been decapitated, we cut to a roast being carved in a
London public house.  Anthony Hopkin's Van Helsing has a knack for
inappropriate jokes, and there are numerous suspicious details in his
portrayal, actions and lines that lead me to  suspect an old connection
between him and his undead foe.  It is not a completely naturalistic
relation of events, and I fear this will alienate some audiences,
although I fervently hope I'm underestimating their tolerance of
cinematic games.   Expect long discussions of DRACULA in
rec.arts.movies, rivalling the "Deckard is a replicant" topics in length
of argument and counterargument.  
     Overall, this is not a movie to be missed.  It has immediately
leapt into my list of favorite movies, and I expect to be seeing it many
times.  Everything about BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA demonstrates Coppola's
mastery.  
