Authors
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
Number of Reviews
16

Title
Review for Muppets From Space (1999)
  In the quasi-biblical prologue to the new Muppet film, Muppets From Space,
the great Gonzo shows up just in time to be rejected from Noah's ark. He
doesn't know what species he is, and he doesn't have a female counterpart, and
basically, he's screwed. Now, one of the many important theories that I have
introduced to the field of film studies is the Puppet Rule of Comedy, which
states that some things are automatically funny as all hell when done by
puppets. One example is in Bride of Chucky, when Chucky and Tiffany make out in
front of a fireplace. Another example is in Muppets From Space, when the Old
Testament Gonzo flings his arms to the heavens and screams "Nooooooo!!!" 
  This sequence sets up a joke I will not give away, which involves Noah being
a cold hearted bastard. Watching this unfold I thought, "Good god, this is
going to be the subversive Muppet movie." But that initial impression was
wrong. The real purpose of this film is indicated quite bluntly by the next
scene, in which the entire cast of Muppets gets up in the morning and gets
ready for the day to the tune of the funk anthem "Brick House." That's right -
Muppets From Space is the funky Muppet movie.
  In an elaborate series of puppet tricks and sight gags that includes Animal
seemingly about to take a piss only to bathe himself in a toilet, the Muppets
get all the way live, get their groove on and - shit, god damn - they get off
their asses and jam. As the vocals kick in with "She was a brick - house" Miss
Piggy steps onto the screen, sporting a modern do that, if it weren't on a foam
rubber pig, might look kinda fly. I don't know. The storyline is set in motion,
the characters are introduced and they all stay on beat. You might find
yourself nodding your head or maybe shaking your elbows a little bit.
   Unfortunately, the movie doesn't maintain this kind of energy throughout. On
the other hand, it does keep the funk anthems coming, from "Get Up Off Of That
Thang" to "It's Your Thang" to "Shining Star" (both the original and a remix by
those master architects of Paul's Boutique, the Dust Brothers).
  The actual storyline does not involve funk, but rather a Close
Encounters-like quest for Gonzo to reunite with his newly discovered alien
ancestors. They send him messages in his breakfast and strike him with
lightning, and he and various human weirdos converge on the agreed upon
coordinates for an alien encounter that, of course, involves a popular Kool and
the Gang song.
  The story isn't very strong. The original Muppet Movie is a classic largely
because you can tell that Jim Henson and his collaborators passionately
believed in their message. They really were thrilled to pieces to be pursuing a
dream with their friends, and though the movie is dripping with cornball
sentiment it never once feels false. It's the real thing, and it makes my eyes
tear up a little every time I see the ceiling inside the soundstage rip open to
reveal the real sky - "Life's like a movie, write your own ending, keep
believing, keep pretending, we've done just what we set out to doooooo" 
  Subsequent Muppet movies, including the new one, don't come close to
duplicating this kind of enormous and overpowering warmth, so you don't really
believe in the stories. You don't care about Gonzo's quest the way you did
about Kermit's, and the villains along the way aren't as amusing - Jeffrey
Tambor doesn't work as well as a hammy main villain as he does with the dumb
sidekick roles he is known for. There are some enjoyably hokey (but weakly
executed) cameos and a good share of funny jokes, but the movie sags in the
middle. Kermit and Fozzy aren't given a whole lot to do, and Gonzo isn't as
funny when he's being sweet and sad as we remember him when he was a crazy
stuntman high on his own showmanship.
  On the other hand, there's a really good balance between old and new Muppets.
The filmmakers make good use of characters from the short lived mid '90s Muppet
Show revival, Muppets Tonight. The George Clinton-looking Clifford makes an
appearance, and there's a very funny cameo by the Italian lounge singer who's
name escapes me and his chimpanzee pal Sal. One of the best puppets is another
Muppets Tonight character, Bobo the bear, who portrays Jeffrey Tambor's
assistant Rentro. Everyone else plays themselves, which is a step in the right
direction. Recent Muppet movies, in which the Muppets acted out stories like
Treasure Island, didn't seem to work as well as the first three Muppet movies.
  The character who steals the show is Pepe, a heavily accented fluffy orange
thing who Miss Piggy calls a shrimp but who refers to himself as a king prawn.
He's another character from Muppets Tonight, and I hope we'll be seeing more of
him. 
  In fact, Pepe is crucial because he's the character who gets most deep into
the funk. During the end credits, we hear him board the Mothership to team up
with George Clinton for a remake of Parliament's "Flashlight." The dense
keyboard grooves aren't quite as slippery-slick this time around, and without
as much backing, it's clear how much more strained Clinton's voice is now than
it was in his youth. But this is still a song that can force you to dance, and
it's funny as hell to hear Dr. Funkenstein interacting with this goofy prawn.
And that in itself pretty much sums up the movie.    
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Idle Hands (1999)
There have been many classic films that provide a nearly flawless balance
between comedy and horror. Two of the most successful, EVIL DEAD 2 and AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON, seem to have been the biggest inspirations for the
new attempted black comedy IDLE HANDS. Unfortunately, the new film is neither
as funny or as scary as its predecessors.
Devon Sawa plays a teenage stoner who finds his right hand possessed by an
evil force that causes him to go on a killing spree. His victims include his
two best friends (Seth Green and Eldon Henson) who come back as zombies because
they are too lazy to move on to the afterlife. There is plenty of mildly
amusing humor involving pot smoking and severed heads, but a lot of it is stuff
we've seen done better before in films like REANIMATOR. 
The stoner stuff is generally more successful than the mutilation slapstick:
Sawa one-ups Sarah Michelle Gellar's cocaine-spoon crucifix in CRUEL INTENTIONS
by wearing a pipe disguised as an asthma inhaler. I also like the scene where
Sawa recognizes two police officers -- "You were seniors when I was a freshman"
- and asks them if they're "holding." The two cops are outraged not so much at
the illegality as at the brazen stupidity of asking cops for weed. Another good
example of the type of humor they're going for is the scene where a horrified
Sawa brings the pre-zombified Green and Henson into his house to show them that
his parents are dead. They don't notice the corpses and assume that their
friend has brought them in to watch the 2 Live Crew video playing on TV. I
myself am always up for a joke involving corpses and 2 Live Crew, and this is a
good one, but it doesn't have good enough timing to come off as anything more
than a cheesy throwaway joke.
There's not a whole lot more to the story. There's not even a full explanation
of where the hand-possession curse came from, why Sawa's character received it
or why he was able to kill his parents without knowing it. What little
explanation there is comes from Vivica A. Fox, who plays a voodoo priestess who
(in the tradition of the bounty hunter guy in JASON GOES TO HELL: THE FINAL
FRIDAY) lives to stab the possessed killer with one of them all powerful magic
dagger things. Jack Noseworthy (star of DEAD AT 21, MTV's embarrassing mid-'90s
attempt at a sci-fi series) plays a local heavy metal enthusiast who drives a
souped-up truck that seems to play Motley Crue's "Shout At the Devil" 24 hours
a day. His funniest moment is when he and Fox (two actors who, I feel compelled
to note, have always bothered me) meet and have an overacting duel.
None of the characters are really fleshed out enough to be likeable or to be
really funny. Most of the leads generate a few laughs, but it's easy to lose
interest in their plight since it's all so lazily sketched out. Particularly
useless is the buxom neighbor chick who Sawa is supposed to have long had a
crush on. You're told that she writes lyrics and plays bass in a band, and that
that's cool, and I guess that's supposed to give her a personality. Although
she is later portrayed as intelligent and heroic, she is instantly charmed by
Sawa, who is frantically wiggling his hand around, making bizarre statements,
drenched in what he claims is cat blood, repeatedly attempting to strangle her.
It's not the most believable teen relationship I've ever seen portrayed on
screen - perhaps it's meant to give hope to today's generation of Last American
Virgins. If this guy can get laid, so can you. And knowing is half the battle.
Although possessed hands had certainly been done before, it seems certain that
the creators of IDLE HANDS were conscious of their film's similarities to the
legendary EVIL DEAD 2 scene in which Ash has a fight with his own hand, then
cuts it off, chases it into a mousehole and hunts it down like Elmer Fudd on
speed. IDLE HANDS never matches the dark looniness of Ash stabbing his own
hand, gleefully shouting "Who's laughing now!?" as the blood sprays on his
face, nor does it have any lowbrow gags as goofily inspired as the severed hand
taunting Ash by giving him the finger. Perhaps Sam Raimi would have known how
to extend the premise to 90 minutes, but these filmmakers don't. While the hand
is only one of many demonic villains in EVIL DEAD 2, it's the only one in IDLE
HANDS, and as the story progresses it becomes increasingly difficult to think
of as a genuine threat. 
While watching the CHILD'S PLAY movies (even the first one, which I am able to
take seriously) I often wonder if Chucky could really be such a threat to these
people. I mean yeah, the little bastard might stab you in the knee or
something. But it shouldn't be too hard to fake him out with a little foot tap
on one side of his head and then punt him hard out the window with the other
foot. (If only little Andy had been on the soccer team Chucky never would have
made it to the third act.) The hand in IDLE HANDS is much less menacing than
Chucky, but of course it is able to defy gravity and many other physical laws
and somehow manages to kill a lot of people. (I was thankful for its magic
fighting powers in one of the film's best moments, when it single-evil-handedly
scalps the lead singer of The Offspring.) 
IDLE HANDS actually has a very similar feel to parts of BRIDE OF CHUCKY. Both
films seem to be primarily lowbrow comedies, but occasionally there are
humorless murder scenes that make you wonder whether the movie is actually
supposed to be scary. BRIDE OF CHUCKY, however, is the far better film - its
berserk puppet mayhem is enjoyably surreal, despite the many jokes that fall
flat. I like movies where hands crawl around on their own and decapitated guys
walk around carrying their own heads, but I've seen them before. BRIDE OF
CHUCKY is only one of two movies I've seen where murderous puppets have sex,
and it's the best of the two. (So how about that - if you're choosing between
BRIDE OF CHUCKY, IDLE HANDS and MEET THE FEEBLES tonight, you have my
recommendation.)
At one point, NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS director Henry Selick was attached to
this script. It makes you wonder what kind of exquisitely designed imagery and
stop motion severed hand action he had planned. The Selick-less film isn't much
to look at, although to their credit the filmmakers mostly stick to old
fashioned makeup effects rather than trendy CGI techniques (which so far tend
to look out of place in horror films). 
As the title implies, the film tries to preach a little bit about laziness
leading to evil. For a while, the story links the hand problem with Sawa's
empty pot-and-television lifestyle. But then it turns out that keeping his
hands occupied really doesn't help, and our heroes smoke up to regain their
strength when it really counts. This is typical of the film - too lazy to
follow through with its theme, too lazy to work as a comedy or as a horror film
or especially as a smooth combination of the two. I didn't hate IDLE HANDS, but
I'd be too lazy to ever go watch it again.
Important note: IDLE HANDS contains the Rob Zombie song "Dragula," which also
appeared recently in THE MATRIX. Another Rob Zombie song, "Living Dead Girl,"
appeared in URBAN LEGEND, BRIDE OF CHUCKY and PSYCHO. And I mean, I like Rob
Zombie. But I think it's time for his movie-soundtrack-hooker-uppers to take a
holiday.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace
Why I love it, despite Jar Jar, and why it will be remembered
  I have a pretty vivid memory of being on the playground when I was in third
grade, either just before or just after Return of the Jedi came out. Some of
the older kids already knew the names of the characters from the movie, and
they were running around playing Return of the Jedi. Not with action figures,
but with themselves. "I'm Han Solo!" They fought over who got to be Salacious
Crum, Jabba's gremlin-like pet who I had yet to set my eyes upon. And as we ran
around the soccer field and through the geometrically arranged tires, we talked
about Star Wars movies and how there were supposed to be three others that took
place before Star Wars. "They're called 'prequels.'"
  I think we knew about them even before then, though. I remember a
neighborhood kid who prided himself on knowing these types of things when they
pertained to Star Wars. (He also liked to pee in ziploc bags and carry them
around with him, but that's irrelevant.) He had read many Star Wars novels,
which he thought were the movies yet to be made. He was fond of a book called
"Han Solo's Revenge" which he didn't seem to understand the title of. He
pointed at a piece of space debris on my sister's Empire Strikes Back t-shirt,
a part of some exploded space ship no doubt, and said, "That's a piece of Han
Solo's revenge." He thought "revenge" was the name of a machine, but he still
knew what a prequel was. 
  In recent years the anticipation grew as Lucas made it clear he was finally
making these things. I was in college when the Star Wars Special Editions came
out, and I must admit it was one of the happiest times of my life. As a
freshman living in a dorm for the first time, I had bonded with my roommates by
staying up all night talking about which Star Wars toys we had owned as
children. It seemed to be the universal connection between people our age, and
we watched the movies together in great excitement when they were re-released
on video in new THX editions. A few years later we were rescheduling our
classes and meetings so we could wait in line for the first shows of the
Special Editions. Now we had an excuse to write and think and talk about Star
Wars all day long. Being college students our favorite place to eat was Taco
Bell, which had now become Star Wars hype central. We could almost literally
eat Star Wars in addition to the sleeping and breathing and what not. 
  It is also important to note at this point that a) we traveled the city by
foot and by bus and b) Toys R Us was located directly across the street from
Taco Bell, i.e. within walking distance, and was stocked with many fine Star
Wars themed leisure products and accoutrements.
  In the school's computer center I read an Ain't It Cool News prequel rumor
about C-3PO being a computer generated mass of wires without his gold
sheathing. I thought it was a cool idea, if it was true, but it was time to
stay away from these rumors. I didn't want to know anything. But I could hold
myself off by re-living the old movies. This time around there were levels to
the movies I had never noticed before. Aspects I had never appreciated. They
were truly growing better with time, even while beginning to seem dated. 
  I have never been one of the hardcore Star Wars obsessives who knows the
names of every character who ever had an action figure, but the entire Star
Wars phenomenon has a strong connection to my heart, so the time of the Special
Editions was like a religious experience for me. And I just kept thinking,
"Man if it's like this now, imagine what it will be like when the prequels
come out."
  I bring up these personal details because being one of the most anticipated
movies of all time means bringing along a whole lot of baggage. Whether or not
you were part of that generation who grew up talking about Star Wars prequels,
you've certainly heard more than enough about them by now. Some people will
never be able to accept a new Star Wars movie after 16 years of waiting. Others
already wanted to hate the movie to prove they're above the hype, or the geeky
guys with the plastic light sabers, or whatever. No one, no matter how
eloquent, will be able to change your mind on The Phantom Menace. It's a movie
that, even more than others, cannot be reduced to a consumer report. But most
critics (many of them in a speeder bike chase, kessel run or pod race to be the
first to hate the new Star Wars movie) have urged people to stay away, making
The Phantom Menace out to be an abomination against cinema. And this after
several summers in a row of absolutely shitty summer blockbusters from Batman
Forever to Armageddon - movies lacking in imagination, common sense and even
style.  
   Although I'm sure these critics genuinely didn't like the movie, many of the
reviews seem more like cultural grandstanding than legitimate criticism. In
probably the most venomous review I've read, Anthony Lane of the New Yorker
admits that he can't call Episode 1 the disappointment of the decade because he
"had a sneaking suspicion it would turn out this way" - implying that he wanted
to enjoy it but it just wasn't good enough. This, though, only after saying
that Star Wars never was very good anyway, that its fans were "nerds" in the
'70s and are now "dweebs," and after blaming the movie for the de-humanization
of cinema, the military over-spending of the Reagan years, and (I swear to God)
the concept of "deathless wars" in Iraq, Kosovo, etc.
  But many who are less extreme than Lane also went in wanting to hate the
movie just because they're "sick of the hype." Unlike blockbuster films of
recent summers, The Phantom Menace did not require manufactured enthusiasm. The
demand for the film was so great that some grew tired of hearing about it
before most of the actual PR hype kicked in. Technically, it's an independent
film, an uncompromising vision without studio tampering or the soulless
anti-art gauntlet of test screenings and focus groups. Still, it's a
moneymaking machine, and every business in the world wants a piece. 
  I honestly believe that the excitement would have been nearly the same with
no advertisements, so when the Taco Bell-KFC-Pizza Hut-Pepsi onslaught began,
it was more than overkill. Meanwhile, every step of the way became a news
event. Both trailers were run uncut not only on Entertainment Tonight and MTV,
but on local news shows. Reporters covered the reactions to the trailer, the
web sites, the release of the toys, the predictions of economic loss due to
employees skipping work on May 19th. On one Seattle station I saw a feature on
what the Seattle Mariners think about Star Wars. 
  But then, when critics saw the movie and tore it apart, the story changed.
"Will it live up to the hype?" the news anchors asked innocently, apparently
not remembering who had interviewed a woman who painted her car like an X-wing,
or set up live cameras at the ticket lines, or started out half of their
reports saying things like, "Well, a lot of people are waiting for the new Star
Wars movie, but we're also waiting for a bit of sunshine this weekend. Harry?"
  So with so many significant pop cultural complications, it's hard to predict
how most people will feel about The Phantom Menace. But I don't think it really
matters -- I think it's a great film. It is probably more flawed than the
original trilogy due mainly to some inept comic relief. But what is good about
it is skin-crawlingly, adrenaline-pumpingly good. The story adds new levels to
the Star Wars mythology, the action scenes are thrilling, the costumes are some
of the best ever put on film, and the visual attention to detail is
unprecedented. I loved it on the first viewing and adored it the second. And
it's great after all these years to be awaiting the second installment, not
knowing what will happen.
  The film starts out brilliantly by illustrating exactly why Jedi Knights are
so revered. For all the talk about Jedi Knights in the original trilogy, Luke's
feats are a tiny plop in a puddle compared to those of young Obi-Wan Kenobi and
his mentor Qui-Gon Jinn (played by Liam Neeson, who I have finally stopped
thinking of as Darkman). The two are sent as ambassadors to the Chancellor, to
conduct negotiations and settle a tax dispute. They hear the sound of their
transport ship being destroyed, and without hesitation whip out their light
sabers. These Jedi oughta be called ambadassadors. They run through the ship,
slaughtering battle droids effortlessly and make a clean escape. At one point
Lucas plays with the icon-status of the light sabers, having the villains
terrified by the sight of Jedi through a cloud of smoke, just a pair of glowing
light sabers. 
  The two travel to the planet under siege, Naboo, to contact their Queen
Amidala. The queen (and her clutch of clone handmaidens) is played by Natalie
Portman, who has already achieved near-legend status as one of those rare child
stars who is respected by adults. I don't think it's too early to say that
Amidala is one of my favorite Star Wars characters. She is quiet and dignified,
but speaks boldly (and in a strange accent) when needed. Unlike the politicians
in our galaxy she tries to avoid putting her people at war, and when it seems
necessary she goes out and leads it herself, planning a three point attack and
storming her occupied palace with a pair of blasters. Her exquisitely designed
royal gowns (of which there are many) rival even the otherworldly beauty of the
blue skinned diva in The Fifth Element. She has an intimidating, regal
presence, comparable to Judi Dench's Oscar winning queen in Shakespeare in
Love. You truly feel like you are in the presence of royalty. 
  Amidala is a more serious and, I think, complicated character than Princess
Leia. My description makes her sound like Wonder Woman, but we also watch her
essentially doom the galaxy for years to come by putting her faith in
Palpatine. And it's interesting to see her surprise as she discovers that
despite all of her politics, some planets still practice slavery because "The
Republic doesn't exist out here." But I am confident that like Leia (her future
daughter), she will be adored and emulated by young girls who like to see
pretty heroines (and their clones) kick ass.
  Soon, of course, the heroes meet up with 9 year old Anakin Skywalker, the boy
who will become Darth Vader. Many have criticized the film for not showing a
seed of evil in the boy, foreshadowing his dark future. I disagree - I think
it's infinitely better to get the audience rooting for the kid, not only so
they can temporarily set aside the tragedy that awaits him, but also because
Darth Vader isn't a purely evil character anyway. After all, he is ultimately
redeemed in Return of the Jedi. So it is more appropriate, I think, to treat
him as a kid who says "Yippee!" a lot than as The Bad Seed.
  Other aspects of Anakin do tie in to his future. He is a master pod racer and
is able to fly a Naboo fighter  - this matches up with the original Star Wars,
where Luke is told that his father was a great pilot before he became a Jedi.
He is also a machine-building prodigy, having built his own pod racer and even
the protocol droid C-3PO. This, I think, is a fitting childhood preoccupation
for the villain who not only lords over enormous "technological nightmares"
like the Death Star, but virtually becomes a machine himself. There is even a
hint in John Williams' Anakin theme, which mourningly intones a few notes of
the unforgettable Imperial Death March.
  Anakin's best scene is probably the one where he barely speaks - the pod
race. A pod race is a dangerous flying drag race through the deserts of
Tatooine, and Anakin is the only human who has ever done it. The scene is as
riveting and full throttle as the speeder bike chase in Return of the Jedi.
It's kind of disturbing to see this little boy zipping through deadly terrain
in a vehicle that's sputtering and losing control and rapidly falling to pieces
- all so the Tatooine slavemasters can gamble with the Hutts. Lucas adds extra
seediness to the proceedings by revealing that Anakin's owner Watto forced him
to enter in previous races even though he doesn't think he's very good.
  I don't think there's even a single child spotted in the previous Star Wars
chapters (unless you count baby Ewoks) so it's surprising how well Anakin fits
the tone. There's an awkward scene where some of the neighborhood kids
(including a kid from Greedo's race) express skepticism about the boy's pod
racer, but for the most part the kids work. There have been criticisms of Jake
Lloyd's acting as Anakin. His performance, admittedly, is not perfect, and
Lucas doesn't help with the awkward editing into the should-be heartbreaking
scene where Anakin bids farewell to his enslaved mother. Lloyd may not be Anna
Paquin, but he hits the mark more often than not, and his boyish enthusiasm is
used humorously. I especially like the scene where Amidala, knowing that her
planet's fate may depend on Anakin winning a pod race, finds out from Anakin's
friend that the boy has never even *finished* a race, let alone won one. To
Amidala's horror, naďve little Anakin smiles, puts his arm around his friend
and boasts, "Kitster's right. I will this time."
  I think these types of moments are charming. I also like when he tells C-3PO,
who he's leaving behind in the slave quarters, that he'll "try" to get his mom
not to sell him. These things remind me of the priceless moment in E.T. when
Drew Barrymore says of the extra-terrestrial, "I don't like his feet." The
acting may not be as note perfect but these moments show a similar
understanding of the way children think. I'm glad that at this age Anakin isn't
talking about being a brave warrior or fighting for justice. Instead, he brags
that he gets to go on a star ship. This playfulness makes it more dramatic
later on when he realizes his purpose in life: to return to Tatooine and free
the slaves (a perfectly mythic subplot that I look forward to in Episode 2).
  While the heroes attempt to deal with the crisis on Naboo, we see the shady
dealings of a Sith lord named Darth Sidious, who is probably Senator Palpatine
in disguise, as he greatly resembles the hooded Emperor Palpatine of later
installments. Sidious dispatches his apprentice Darth Maul to assassinate the
Jedi. Maul has already become a pop culture icon just by appearing briefly in
the first Phantom Menace trailer. His simple look of primal evil - black cloak,
red and black face, crown of horns, demonic yellow eyes - has so captured the
fascination of fans that virtually every 12:01 showing on May 19th must have
had a guy dressed as him, toting a double bladed light saber. 
  After such a build up, some were disappointed that Maul turns out to be a
mysterious and briefly sighted presence in the movie. (But come on, man, it's
your own damn fault for building a cult around a character from a movie you
hadn't seen.) Maul's fanboy appeal is comparable to that of Boba Fett, who is
actually much less significant in the Star Wars saga, and has less screen time.
I think he's perfect. 
  At some point, I will be expected to choose one of three or four famous Star
Wars catch phrases and use it to attack the new movie. I'll go ahead and go
with, "There is a disturbance in the Force, and its name is Jar Jar Binks." Jar
Jar is a computer generated creature called a Gungan, an outcast from the
underwater kingdom on Naboo. He's also the comic relief character, and the
first character in the entire Star Wars saga that I can't stand. 
  I want to make one thing clear, before I attack Jar Jar: I am pro-Ewok. I
never knew until a few years ago that Return of the Jedi, and specifically the
Ewoks, were looked upon with disdain by many Star Wars fans. The Ewoks, goes
the argument, are cuddly little bears just thrown in to be cute and to attract
kids. Having watched the movie several times since learning of this school of
thought, I still can't find any way that it makes sense. The Ewoks are savage
little bastards who try to cook our heroes for dinner, and who stone, log and
rope stormtroopers to death in the climactic battle that culminates the
humanity-over-technology theme of the trilogy. The first time you see Ewoks,
they are creepy and irritable. They look more like rabid rats than teddy bears.
They're not half as cute as the Jawas, who as far as I know have never suffered
the "cute" criticism.
  And even if the Ewoks are adorably cute to some people, isn't that sort of
cool? Cute little teddy bears who eat human flesh? It's like saying the killer
dolls in Barbarella were just thrown in to appeal to kids who like dollies.
It's just plain wrong. Up with Ewoks, I say. 
  But there is an Ewok moment that I don't think is so hot: the one in the
middle of the battle where Wicket swings a rock around and hits himself in the
face with it. It's not a terrible joke, I can live with it, but it's
cartoonishly out of place. It kind of seems like it should be accompanied by
Three Stooges sound effects. Imagine a character that has none of the
rabid-rat-menace of the Ewoks, but swings rocks into his face repeatedly.
That's Jar Jar.
  Some people have called Jar Jar a racist stereotype - a rather ludicrous
description for a character that is more reminiscent of Slimer from the
Ghostbusters cartoon and Roger Rabbit than of any specific race, ethnicity or
nationality. I don't have a problem with his Gungan pidgin ("yousa thinks you
people gonna die?") which continues the Star Wars tradition of cultural detail
amongst aliens. I do have a problem with his voice, though, which is that same
annoying squeaky voice they used for Slimer, or for Punky Brewster's cartoon
sidekick Glomer. You know - the "funny" voice that Dave Coulier used on Full
House after he tired of his Popeye and Bullwinkle impressions. I want Jar Jar
to be a character I can take seriously on occasion, but he's not, because he
speaks in a voice that says, "I'm sure as hell not funny, but you know I'm
trying to be!" 
  If he were to speak in a lower voice he wouldn't be nearly as hard to take.
But even still, his purpose in the story so far seems to be to knock things
over, stick out his tongue and step in creature manure. His character doesn't
grow or evolve. He only helps people on accident. He doesn't show another side,
and worst of all he doesn't build a strong relationship with any of the other
characters - he just follows them around, but it seems like you're supposed to
assume they like him. If he returns in future installments it's going to be
hard to redeem him. Unless little Anakin first practices his long distance
strangling technique on the zany Gungan.
  But The Phantom Menace survives Jar Jar, because it's working on other levels
than just the wacky guy falling down. The plot is more complicated than
previous chapters, and although many have attacked it as a "kiddie movie" due
to the Jar Jar problem, it's hard for me imagine kids knowing what the hell is
going on. Even for reasonably intelligent adults like - I'd like to think - me,
it may take multiple viewings to keep up with all of the politics. How many
kiddie movies revolve around tax disputes, trade embargoes, votes of no
confidence? If this movie is for kids I wonder if tense senate hearings will
become the next big thing in PG rated movies, replacing the John Hughes
trademark of inept burglars who get pelted in the balls by Rube Goldberg-esque
booby traps.
  It wasn't until the Special Editions that I thought about the multiple
meanings of the title "Return of the Jedi." Growing up, I assumed it referred
to Luke's return to Tatooine. But now I think it refers both to the
resurrection of the concept of the Jedi and to the return of the Jedi Anakin
Skywalker, who has been buried inside the Sith lord Darth Vader until he
re-emerges in the climax. "The Phantom Menace" has multiple meanings as well.
Most obviously, it refers to the hooded Darth Sidious, who controls the
invasion of Naboo and the attacks on the Jedi without our heroes ever knowing
of his existence. Secondly, it refers to the invasion of Naboo itself, which on
the surface appears to be about taxes but is actually a front for removing the
Chancellor and replacing him with Palpatine. 
  With Anakin's boyish optimism and Jar Jar's wacky antics, the surface of the
movie is fairly light-hearted. But the menace lies underneath, because of our
knowledge of what is to come. This is a movie where the heroes put their faith
in something we know won't pan out the way they want it to. Roger Ebert has
said that Luke Skywalker is actually the chosen one who the Jedi are looking
for in Anakin. I prefer the more ominous theory that Anakin is indeed "the
chosen one, who will bring balance to the force," but that he will bring
balance by being the evil Darth Vader. The Jedi's evil counterparts the Sith
have been extinct for a millennium, so clearly the balance is leaning toward
the good side of the scale. I think Yoda and Mace Windu can sense that Anakin
is indeed the chosen one of their faith, but they don't want to face what that
means. 
  The film asks you to care about little Anakin, and it works. It wasn't until
the day after my first viewing that some of the irony hit me. At one point,
Darth Maul speeds toward Qui-Gon and Anakin on a sort of speeder bike. Qui-Gon
yells, "Anakin, drop!", saving the life of Darth Vader, the man who will help
conquer the galaxy and who will slay Qui-Gon's apprentice, Obi-Wan. While the
movie pretends to be a happy adventure about a boy and his Jedi buddies it
inches toward heartbreaking tragedy.
  And still, it's a hell of an adventure. The genuinely thrilling climax jumps
smoothly between the Queen's siege of her own palace, a huge battle between
Gungans and battle droids, Darth Maul taking on Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan in a light
saber duel, and Anakin's "accidental" attack on a space station. (I put
"accidental" in quotes because although Anakin doesn't destroy the control ship
intentionally, I suspect the Force is working through him to achieve its own
goals.)
  The light saber fight is the best in the Star Wars saga so far, containing
more nimble choreography than previous entries. Maul, played by the stuntman
Ray Park, works in a number of flips and martial arts kicks (things that were
stiffly hinted at as Jedi skills in The Empire Strikes Back) and takes on two
Jedi at once. One of my favorite moments in the film is when a series of
energy-walls separates the three combatants, so they immediately turn off their
light sabers and wait. Qui-Gon patiently meditates while Maul paces back and
forth, his eyes satanically glued to his enemy. In all of the depictions of raw
evil in Lucas' films, none has ever approached the pure hatred in this man's
eyes.
  For fans of the series, The Phantom Menace is loaded with precious touches.
We get to see the time when Jedi were plentiful, so much so that they had a
council led by Yoda and Samuel L. Jackson. We see cameos by rowdy sand people,
Wookie senators, even Jabba's girlfriend. But most of all, we get to explore
new planets and learn new details of the old ones, like the workings of the
Tatooine slave trade. I didn't like Jar Jar, as I mentioned, but another
computer-generated character, Watto, is more successful. He's a little, snouted
guy with humming bird wings (the first flying character in the Star Wars
universe?) who trades junk and makes Anakin work in his shop. He's a slimy
character who is never redeemed, but when he loses Anakin in a bet he looks
kind of sad, and you almost feel sorry for him. I often think it's this extra
dimension - like the mourning Rancor owner in Return of the Jedi - that makes
me love the Star Wars universe, and make it seem like a real place.
  There are other touches that weaken that real place feeling, though. Some of
the character designs seem a little out of place. There's a two headed
commentator at the pod races who talks just like a human sports announcer and
whose faces look kind of like characters from Antz. It damages the
slice-of-alien-life illusion that I loved so much in the cantina scene and in
Jabba's palace.
  But for the most part the illusion is there, and in far more visual detail
than ever before. Lucas has truly taken computer-generated imagery to the
logical next level, painting entire worlds with it, not just inserting a
monster here or there. Though I believe The Phantom Menace will be remembered
fondly for the same reasons as the other Star Wars movies, it will be most
notable historically as the movie that raised the stakes for digital visual
effects by about fifteen or twenty notches.
  Acclaiming the special effects in a movie usually sounds like faint praise,
and with a Star Wars movie it pretty much goes without saying. But I don't
think people are acknowledging the kind of unprecedented visual spectacle we're
dealing with here, where the vast majority of shots combine live action
elements with computer animation, matte paintings and miniature models. It's so
elaborate and non-stop that it becomes its own seamless reality. In the
original trilogy you might think okay, these are real actors on a real set, but
this next shot coming up - that's stop motion. The Phantom Menace visuals are
so elaborate that there's no room for that. There are stretches where, as far
as I know, nothing you're seeing on screen is real, but you don't think of it
as Toy Story, you think of it as a real desert with real podracers flying
through it. I'll be damned if I can figure out what's a computer image, what's
a model and what's just a pile of dirt.
  The phenomenal detail of The Fifth Element seems lazy compared to what goes
on in The Phantom Menace. I believe this will have a major effect on summer
event movies where the main gimmick is the visual effects. How can you make a
movie like Godzilla after everyone has seen this? "Hey, look at this - a
computer animated monster. Can you believe this? Pay me money." The Phantom
Menace has a sequence early on, one of the weaker ones in fact, that has three
computer-generated giant fish with headlights shining on them in the darkness
of water. All of them are far more impressive than the giant iguanaman in
Godzilla, which had nothing else to offer. In The Phantom Menace, they're a
forgettable throwaway, not the main event.
  Will this force the purveyors of big genre movies to put some more elbow
grease into their special effects? Or will it make them say, "Fuck it, I can't
deal with it, I'm doing something smaller"? I don't know. But I don't think it
can be ignored. Lots of people mourn the dominance of big budget effects movies
and prefer smaller, earthbound, character driven movies. Movies that take place
in the real world, or that leave things to the imagination. And obviously there
will always be a place for those. But Lucas is dealing in fantasy films, in
documenting worlds that don't exist and making them seem like they do. Since at
least the summer of 1990, when the T-1000 morphed into liquid metal, filmmakers
have been talking about how computer technology will narrow the gap between
what you can imagine and what you can put on screen. The Phantom Menace has
proven that theory. For some filmmakers this will be liberating, for others it
might be frightening. Because what if we can see into their imagination and
there's nothing there? What if all they can think of is a big iguanaman?
  Lucas gives us more than an iguanaman. Lots, lots, lots, lots, lots more. He
has given me a chance to see my 2 year-old nephew holding a plastic light
saber, not really knowing what it is, saying, "I'm going to rescue Grandma."
He's made me remember what it is that I felt in that drive-in so many years
ago, seeing Star Wars as a child. And at the same time he's made me realize
what the adults of the time - the ones who were turned on by Star Wars, anyway
- might have felt, and how they might have questioned the future of popular
entertainment in light of what they've just witnessed. I suspect The Phantom
Menace is the beginning of more than just the Star Wars saga. But I guess I'll
have to wait until the next episode to find out for sure.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Rage: Carrie 2, The (1999)
  Carrie is one of my favorite films. It's a masterfully crafted gothic fairy
tale and one of the best teen angst movies ever made. Carrie is a realistic
outcast. She's not a cool outcast like Winona Ryder sometimes plays, or like
Samantha Mathis in Pump Up the Volume. Carrie wouldn't have fit in at my high
school. She looks genuinely plain - no glasses, either - she is socially
awkward in a believable way, and her religious zealot mother is so vividly nuts
that you can believe poor Carrie would be put in the humiliating situation of
having her first period in the gym shower without knowing what's happening to
her.
  Brian DePalma's virtuoso technique squeezes dread - not suspense, but dread -
out of your stomach like it's orange juice. All the pieces fall into place -
the prom queen, the bucket of blood, the rope, the telekinetic explosion
yearning for release. You know exactly what's going to happen and DePalma knows
that you know, and he makes you waaaaaaaaaiiiiiiiiiit for it in beautifully
agonizing slow motion.
  And because it's such a great movie, and because it's almost as old as I am,
and because the titular protagonist ends up pretty damn dead in the end, it's
just not cool to make a sequel to it. My expectations were low.
  For me, there is a precedent for uneccessary sequels that turn out
surprisingly good, because I really enjoyed last year's badly titled Halloween:
H20 - Twenty Years Later. It's a better movie than The Rage: Carrie 2, with a
fantastic third act and with the advantage of capping off a series of bad
sequels (rather than being the first). Because of H20, I tried to keep an open
mind about this sequel, although I also figured lightning couldn't strike twice
when it comes to unwanted sequels to '70s horror classics.
  Well, it didn't, but it could have been worse. Standing on its own, The Rage
isn't all that bad. It doesn't all work, but it has its strengths, and it
doesn't feel very similar to other teen oriented horror films of the late '90s.
  The best thing about the movie is Emily Bergl, who plays Rachel, the also
telekinetic half sister of Carrie White. Her performance (aside from the
climactic telekinetic rampage) is believable and charismatic. She's good
looking in a non-movie star type of way, and the writers wisely don't cast her
as an ugly duckling or a freak. When I first saw the poster for the movie, I
worried that they were replacing Carrie with a hipster outcast. Fortunately,
they don't push the outcast angle (or the hipster, for that matter). Rachel
isn't one of the popular kids, and that's all. She's not Carrie White awkward -
she even dates. And to my surprise, it works. She's a different type of
character, she's not a sub-Carrie, and that's fortunate.
  The two villainous football players are also well cast. One of them looks too
old to be in high school, but his bulky frame and hairy upper lip are dead on.
The other one is played by Zachary Ty Bryan from Home Improvement. I think he's
supposed to be some type of teen hearthrob, but he's a hideously ugly chunk of
smirk and freckles, and I think he may have really been on the football team at
my high school. It's nice to see a high school movie that acknowledges that
ugly - but not fat (the Varsity Blues clause) - football players can still be
the popular kids just because they play sports with the popular kids.
  The plot works surprisingly well for something that mirrors the original
Stephen King derived plot. There is another cruel prank at a social gathering
that leads to telekinetic mayhem, but the prank and the way it unfolds is
different enough from the original that it doesn't seem very formulaic. 
  In most ways, Carrie 2 captures high school life more accurately than other
teen films of the '90s. Rachel's room actually looks like a real bedroom. She
has Marilyn Manson posters on her wall but it's not pushed on us as a mark of
rebellion. She's not much of a type, she's into a lot of different things. She
listens to Billie Holiday and has a close relationship with her dog. (I didn't
buy that she and her best friend would have matching tattoos that they would
touch and say "Best buds," but hey, you can't win 'em all.)
  The dialogue isn't flowery, self-referential or steeped in pop culture.
(There is a somewhat awkward conversation about the band Garbage, but it is
more an attempt at illustrating the social connection high school kids feel
through music than it is a Tarantino or Williamsonism.) Occasionally I was
impressed by bits of dialogue that struck me as realistic teenspeak (Rachel
playfully telling her friend "You suck," the football player's use of the word
"dude"). The only thing that marks this is as a post-Scream horror flick is an
amusing bit where a villain asks "What's your favorite scary movie?" over the
phone - in a Donald Duck voice.
  Unfortunately, these strengths aren't enough to hold up the whole movie. The
biggest connections to the first film are the ones that don't work. Amy Irving
returns as Sue Snell, whose plight was so moving in the first film. She really
means to help Carrie but she fails, and ends up getting almost as raw of a deal
as Carrie. Now Sue is a guidance counselor who discovers Rachel's secret and
tries to get her help before history repeats itself. The premise is sound, but
the execution is weak. Sue seems tagged on to make the sequel official. Most of
her scenes are separate from Rachel, visiting Rachel's mother in the
inappropriately named Arkham Asylum, driving around trying to find Rachel only
to be given a sudden, meaningless (if rather spectacular) death. Perhaps if
DePalma were directing, Sue's scenes would have been tense, suspenseful, a race
against the clock. But the timing is all off. She never seems like she exists
in the same timeline as the other characters. And she's just not as interesting
as she used to be anyway. Worst of all, she keeps having flashbacks of footage
from the first film, which remind you how much more stylish it was and how
badly you wish the theater had accidentally been shipped a pristine new print
of the original, not the sequel.
  There are a few more subtle homages to the original that aren't bad, in
particular a shot in the opening scene where red paint drips on a Virgin Mary
icon (a surrogate prom queen).
  Most of the stylistic flourishes are annoying instead of captivating. The
colors are not as vivid as DePalma's, but then they keep switching to black and
white. Not striking black and white, just bad TV trying to be arty black and
white. A character who carries a camcorder is used, a few times, as an excuse
for cheesy video POV shots. But then they try to get really fancy schmancy with
two football players talking while highlight films are projected on to them,
which is odd since we already have the camcorder character so we know this team
would just use a VCR.
  Things really fall apart at the climax. The action is stilted and sprinkled
with Hellraiser 3 style deaths. Bergl, sadly, falls into a pale imitation of
Spacek's wide eyed trance in the original. Most uncomfortably, a sample of
Piper Laurie's "They're all gonna laugh at you!" squawk is incorporated into a
Super Mario Brothers-esque techno song. (The scoring throughout the film is
cheesy, especially when compared to Pino Donaggio's lush orchestral work.)
  Not surprisingly, there's an epilogue tag vaguely inspired by the legendary
Carrie's-hand scene. Also not surprisingly, it's not very effective.
Fortunately, it doesn't seem to set up much of a Carrie 3. For that, they'd
need to go really off the wall. I suggest Carries, the story of the military's
experiments in genetically engineered telekinetic warriors, all played by Sissy
Spacek.
  I'm glad Carrie 2 isn't as bad as I'd expected, and that I got some enjoyment
out of it. But I still wish it hadn't been made. The aspects that work are
pretty admirable, but it's just not worth it. I just don't like the idea of
Carrie becoming Carrie 1.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Corruptor, The (1999)
  As far as I know, Chow Yun Fat is the most charismatic man alive. If I was
smart when I was a kid, I would have trained to become Chow Yun Fat as an
adult. If there were some way I could pay money to actually become Chow Yun
Fat, I'd probably be saving up. There is something powerful about his presence
that I couldn't really describe with words. So insert you're cliche here - he's
The Man, he's the Master, he's God.
  I haven't seen all of his work, but I've seen enough of the basics (The
Killer, Hard Boiled, A Better Tomorrow) to see that he's a lot more than a
gunslinging badass. He's a great actor. Unfortunately, his American debut The
Replacement Killers was only interested in the gunslinging badass side of his
persona. He pulled off the role (with minimal English) and his charisma was
powerful enough to hold the movie. But fortunately The Corruptor - while no The
Killer - is a much better vehicle for his talents.
  The new film reminds me more of Hard Boiled than anything else - sort of an
American take on that brand of HK crime epic. There's a gang war, rival cops,
confusion about who's on which side. There's no shootout in a teahouse, but
there's one in a lamp store. There's even a scene where Wahlberg walks around
with a toothpick hanging out of his mouth, which may or may not be an homage to
Tequila's habit in Hard Boiled. Of course, The Corruptor's gun battles and
miscellaneous mayhem, while pretty extravagant by American standards, don't
have the same balletic grace and adrenaline pumping power of Woo's films. And I
would understand if someone found the portrayal of Chinese gangs, prostitutes
and crooked cops offensive in the context of an American movie (although I
think the movie -- perhaps due to the influence of Woo's films -- goes to
unusual length to add ambiguity and dimension to the
white-cop-comes-into-Chinatown scenario).
  I'm also a fan of Mark Wahlberg. I think his performance in Boogie Nights
should have won him an Oscar. He's talented enough to make me forget about his
past as a racist hoodlum and, worse, an extremely bad bubble gum rapper. But
like I told a co-worker before the screening, "He's not gonna rap, is he? Then
there's nothing to worry about." 
  Outside of Boogie Nights, Wahlberg mostly exudes a boyish innocence that
makes him very likable. I enjoyed his work in Traveller and The Big Hit (which
had some extremely bad comic moments but went far to establish Wahlberg as a
likable and agile action hero). His role here isn't quite as consistent, but it
works, and I'm not sure there's anyone else I would have rather seen in the
role. His best moments are on the too rare occasions when he gets a real
chemistry going with Chow, like in the scene where they're staking out a drug
house and he teases Chow by pretending to misinterpret his comment as a
confession of deep love.
  The shootouts are pretty long, but they never give you the same "Oh my god,
am I really seeing this?" shock of, say, the hospital shootout in Hard Boiled.
Still, they have more punch than standard Hollywood fare. I particularly liked
the drawn out gunbattle/car chase, even if the style is somewhere in between
the kind of fluid editing I prefer and the incomprehensible Bruckheimer style
that I usually despise.
  The storyline is fairly standard but it's more quick paced and complicated
than your usual cop movie. I'm embarrassed to admit that I couldn't even keep
up with a few of the story points. I don't think it's a particularly well
written film but it's better than I expected, improving as it builds. What
struck me is that by the end of the movie I really did care about Chow's
character and wasn't sure how I wanted the film to end. In the last act he has
become, by the usual action movie standards, "the bad guy," but Wahlberg and
the audience (me, anyway) still like him. In real life, I don't think crooked
cops - hell, straight cops - are exactly cool. (Sure, a society may need rules,
but you gotta wonder about someone who actually wants to be the guy to enforce
them. And then when they don't even want to follow the rules themselves, is
there any arguing that they are soulless bastards?) So I found myself torn
wondering if I'd rather see Wahlberg and internal affairs bust a corrupt cop
who had it coming, or see Chow - the man, the master, God - get away scott
free. And while I was struggling with this, I realized that the movie was
working on me.
  The Corruptor isn't the masterpiece we're all hoping King's Ransom (Chow's
long rumored reunion with Woo) will be, but it's light years ahead of the
could-be-straight-to-video formulaic junk of The Replacement Killers. It's
worth it just for the joy of Chow's acting - he's not just the cocky badass,
he's also the jokester, the brooder, the guy who's been betrayed, the guy who
cooks. It's a real role, and he eats it up. It's also notable that his English
skills have improved immensely - I think he speaks it better than Jackie Chan,
who's been trying for much longer. 
  I wish The Corruptor had opened big so that our man could be considered
"bankable." This is an actor who should get to do whatever the hell he wants.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
  I have a complicated relationship with Disney movies. In 1988, when Who
Framed Roger Rabbit came out and revived the American animation industry from a
creative and financial coma, I was about to enter high school. I had recently
become obsessed with Popeye and Rocky and Bullwinkle, and the Richard Williams
directed, Tex Avery inspired animated antics of the Toontown characters were
enough to push me over the edge into a permament fascination with animation.
And unless you're a white male in his 20's (which I am) who thinks that
animation is only sophisticated if it has big breasted women being raped by
demons and/or taking showers with giant robots (which I am not), being an
animation buff means watching every new Disney feature hoping that it will be
one of the good ones.
  And I have done that, enjoying all of the modern Disney features on some
level, including the unpopular ones. The widely criticized Pocahontas is one of
my favorites, combining more complex emotional situations than most Disney
features with some of Glen Keane's best animation acting - I like to cite the
silent first meeting between Pocohontas and John Smith as some of the greatest
character animation ever created. My absolute favorite of the modern Disney
movies is The Rescuers Down Under, which seems to be mostly ignored for the
most inane possible reason: disappointing box office returns. But to me it is a
great piece of entertainment. It inventively elaborates on the miniature mouse
society from the first Rescuers film, stands out from other Disney films by
being a full fledged action adventure, and contains awe inspiring animation of
a giant eagle (again, the work of Glen Keane) which is still impressive after
ten years of innovations in animation technique. In a way it, not The Little
Mermaid, should stand as the marker between old and new Disney, since it was
the first to use the CAPS system for computerized coloring.
  I do recognize the limitations of the Disney formula and am frustrated by the
company's tendency to be conservative. Therefore, I find that Disney movies are
best appreciated taking into account the constraints of the Disney formula, and
in comparison to other Disney movies. When compared to, say, The Nightmare
Before Christmas or The Thief and the Cobbler, Disney's version of Hercules
wouldn't be particularly striking in the design department. But compared to
other Disney features it seems shockingly adventurous, a near revolutionary
departure from the house style. And I admire the boundaries Disney pushes in
tiny steps, because I'm anxiously waiting for them to push hard enough that the
whole formula breaks and they aren't able to put it back together for a while.
  I also have somewhat of a bias against musicals. Some of my best friends are
musicals, such as The Nightmare Before Christmas and Willy Wonka and the
Chocolate Factory. But I have a definite preference for the Nightmare style of
musical, where the songs are impossible to separate from the story. They push
the plot along - most of the time, they *are* the plot - and they illustrate
the characters' emotions with a vividness that just could not be accomplished
with dialogue. What frustrates me is the Lion King style of musical, where the
songs seem to be there just because someone higher up wanted to have songs in
the movie. A lot of them really don't seem to have a strong enough story or
character purpose, and I'm reminded of the way Beavis and Butthead's storyline
is constantly interrupted by irrelevant music video breaks. The Lion King is
often held up as the pinnacle of Disney achievement, but to me it's the nadir.
Scenes like the death of Mufasa and the adult Simba's meeting with Rafiki are
dramatic and powerful, but I have a hard time appreciating them because I am so
distracted by the movie's tendency to spin off on tangents like the very
popular song about the farting warthog.
  All this is to establish why, without bursting out of the Disney formula,
Tarzan is the kind of Disney movie I have been waiting for. There's enough
tradition in there to satisfy the mothers and fathers who want to know what to
expect from a Disney movie before they buy their kids the video. But it
emphasizes the aspects of Disney movies that I like (emotional drama,
tremendous and at times subtle character animation) while playing down the ones
that I don't (unfunny comic relief, musical numbers). It's my kind of Disney
movie.
  For starters, Tarzan is not a musical. I didn't think Disney would ever try
this again after the financial failure of Rescuers Down Under (which also
wasn't a musical) but perhaps the success of Toy Story taught them that it's
possible make piles of money and even sell soundtracks without having sing
along songs. The catch is, the non-musical Disney formula requires the presence
of songs by cheeseball white rockers (in this case, Phil Collins, whose songs
are far less tolerable than Randy Newman's). It's a sacrifice I'm willing to
make, though, because without farting warthog tangents the story and characters
feel far more developed. Even the montages seem designed to tell the story
without the song lyrics, rather than just being there to illustrated the lyrics
with wacky antics.
  Before the release of Tarzan, there were rumors circulating that the more
serious tone of the film would be damaged by a musical number performed by a
scatting Rosie O'Donnell character named Terk. These reports were greatly
exaggerated. Tarzan purists looking for a serious, dramatic translation of the
story have every right to be disappointed. But when looked at as a Disney
movie, in relation to the studio's body of work, the song doesn't prevent the
film from being surprisingly serious. The scene, in which animals innocently
destroy a human camp, is more of a musical sound effect collage than an actual
musical number. It's playful and entertaining and organic to the story. I
would, however, like it better if Terk were breaking plates in awe like the
others, rather than dancing around conducting the whole primate orchestra. 
  Other than that there's not much emphasis on Rosie O'Donnell, and she doesn't
come across as embarrassingly unfunny as previous Disney comic relief
characters like Timon and Pumbaa and the Wisecracking Gargoyles. She doesn't
even fit the formula of the pasted on comic relief character, because she's
central to the story, having grown up with Tarzan and being bitter to see him
taking on relationships with humans. Terk's elephant buddy Tantor is a little
harder to swallow, because his design is more cartoony than the other animals,
and it's not clear whether he wanders away from his elephant troop to hang with
the gorillas, or whether he actually lives with them. There's also an
unfortunate incident of Tantor using his trunk as a periscope, which seems more
out of place than it would in other Disney movies since the movie for the most
part avoids that type of joke.
 The main advantage of an animated Tarzan, of course, is the way Tarzan moves.
It's Glen Keane to the rescue again, and it's hard to imagine another animator
pulling it off so well. Tarzan is a nearly naked mass of muscles, and he swings
deftly from vine to vine, barefoot surfs across trees and walks on his knuckles
like a gorilla. He even uses his toes as fingers, something I have a hard time
imagining in live action. He's an animal inside a human body, and he does his
best to mold his body into the proper animal shape. It's hard to imagine that
this portrayal of Tarzan will ever be topped, at least physically.
  My favorite character is an actual gorilla, though - Kurchak, the patriarch
of the gorilla family. His design is more realistic than most Disney animals,
but his arms are practically the size of an entire human. Voiced grimly by good
ol' Lance Henriksen, his menace and his relationship with Tarzan are the
emotional center of the film. All of the gorillas are afraid of Kurchak, but
Tarzan has particular reason to fear him, because he has never been accepted as
a real gorilla. When Tarzan discovers that there are other "creatures who look
like me," he threatens to endanger the gorilla family by leading humans to
them. Kurchak intimidates Tarzan, fiercely telling him to stay away from
humans. It's sad for many reasons, not the least of which is Tarzan and the
audience's knowledge that Kurchak is probably right.
  From childhood on, Tarzan is always trying to prove himself to Kurchak, but
of course it's not easy. When a vicious leopard attacks Kurchak and injures
him, Tarzan saves the day for the first time in an intense fight sequence which
culminates in Tarzan raising the droopy corpse of his opponent in the air and
making his trademark primal yell. The conflict is all in the facial expressions
as Tarzan tries to address Kurchak, not certain whether he's made him proud or
only humiliated him. Both in dramatic sophistication and in raw brutality,
sequences like this contradict Disney's reputation as a studio interested only
in kiddie fluff. Kurchak's final scene with Tarzan is even more powerful, and
the animation of the gorilla's facial expressions is incredible.
  Jane is also a strong character, far more memorable than most Disney heroines
due to a humorous vocal performance by Minnie Driver. Jane isn't the usual
blandly positive role model for young girls. She's humorously high strung, and
a little self-deprecating. Her first scene with Tarzan is a classic scene, far
more spot-on than Disney usually is when it comes to being funny. 
  Tarzan is also more action packed than most Disney films. A new computer
technique called Deep Canvas allows Tarzan and Jane to swing and swoop and
slide in every direction through complex, three-dimensional jungle backgrounds.
There are a few vine-swinging chase scenes that look and feel like
rollercoaster rides - a nice, unexpected touch.
  But what makes Tarzan more memorable for me are the quiet, subtle moments. I
like the way they approach the language barrier between animals and humans.
Tarzan has a talent for mimicking sounds, and uses it to learn a few phrases
from Jane. When he teaches Jane how to speak to gorillas, he teaches her to say
"Jane stays with Tarzan," and giggles like a little boy as he does it.
  There are many scenes where the animals only speak in animal noises. The
whole scene where Kala discovers baby Tarzan and decides to keep him is sad and
scary and entirely without words. Even when the characters do talk, it's the
physical gestures that end up saying the most - like the way Kala backs away in
fear when Tarzan brings humans to see her, or the way her eyes tear up when she
sees Tarzan wearing human clothes.
  The only major weakness in the film is in its villain, Clayton, a member of
Jane's party who secretly (but obviously) wants to poach the gorillas. His
design is inelegant, his voice is typical of Disney villains and his character
has far less dimension than the others in the film. He does, however, have an
emotional final showdown with Tarzan and Gets His a little more brutally than
other Disney villains. Ouch.
  I'm also not a fan of Jane's father, Porter, who looks suspiciously similar
to Belle's father in Beauty and the Beast. However, the only time he really
interferes with the story is in the finale, when he rather awkwardly invites
himself to move in with his daughter and her new boyfriend.
  But these aren't the things you come away from Tarzan thinking of. You
remember Kurchak's eyes as he dies, and young Tarzan noticing that his fingers
are different from his mother's, and Tarzan looking unnatural whenever he tries
to move like a human. 
  With some Disney movies, I always remember the unfortunate parts I didn't
like. When I think of  Hunchback of Notre Dame, I think of those ridiculous
comic relief gargoyles inappropriately joining in the climactic battle before I
think of the movie's attempt to deal with more serious, adult themes like the
lust of priests. But Tarzan strikes a better balance, so when I think of it I
think of nothing but classic scenes.  I don't think Tarzan is as perfect an
animated drama as, say, Kiki's Delivery Service. But I do think it's one of
Disney's best.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Jawbreaker (1999)
  In Jawbreaker, the braindead teen angst comedy from writer/director Darren
Stein, a Heathers-like clique of popular high school girls led by the venomous
Courtney (Rose McGowan) accidentally asphyxiate one of their own while
kidnapping her as a birthday prank. They decide, as teens sometimes will, to
return the dead friend to her bedroom and make it look like she was raped. The
scheme gets complicated when the timid, socially retarded school misfit Fern
Mayo (a cartoonish Carrie lookalike in a fright wig) discovers their plot.
Courtney makes Fern an offer she can't refuse: if Fern doesn't tell anyone that
the nice popular girl she has a crush on has been murdered, Courtney will give
Fern a makeover to make her popular. The audience is not given any compelling
evidence that any human being would go for this ludicrous deal. But hey, says
Stein, they're only teens. What do they want, believable characters and
situations? Sheesh.
  Jawbreaker is one of the best examples ever of a high school movie that seems
to come from filmmakers who never went to high school, but instead watched a
lot of movies about it. Unlike the earlier dark teen angst films that it
blatantly apes (mainly Heathers and Carrie), it seems completely clueless about
what is funny and terrifying about being a teenager. Stein clumsily imitates
superficial aspects of those films without ever capturing their satirical
accuracy, their emotion, their storytelling or their characterization. You
don't believe in these characters or what happens to them and you can't be sure
how you're supposed to feel about them. All you know is that whatever it is,
you don't feel it.
  Heathers is powerful because it has protagonists we relate to and villains we
know in the real world, and it slashes at them with a dark, morbid wit. Stein
goes for the morbid and leaves out the wit. His villains remind us of the
villains in the other films more than they remind us of the real people those
films remind us of. But even as super villains they're not as successful.
McGowan's most-popular-girl-in-school is a "megabitch," but she doesn't have
any of the enjoyable wickedness of Shannen Doherty's Heather. Daniel Waters'
memorable Heathers dialogue is full of invented slang ("What is your damage,
Heather?"), clever insults ("Grow up, Heather - bulimia is so '87", "Football
season is over. Kurt and Ram had nothing left to offer this school but date
rapes and AIDS jokes") and occasional surprising vulgarities ("Well fuck me
gently with a chainsaw!", "Why are you pulling my dick, Veronica?"). Stein
isn't that funny - he tries to give the dialogue a crispness by sandwiching
'fucking's between phrases ("Peachy fucking keen") but it just comes off as
pale imitation.
  Heathers doesn't just take a big bite out of high school life, chew it up and
spit it out on the floor. It knows its targets and attacks them with precision.
It paints a vivid portrait of a world of cruel teenagers and parents whose
understanding of their kids' problems comes from clueless local news reports. A
world of macho dads who bury their sons in football helmets, flakey hippie
teachers who try to heal the school with "The New Happiness" banners, a
preacher who sees the word "eskimo" underlined in a dead girl's copy of Moby
Dick and says, "Let's hope she's rubbing noses with Jesus!" Part of the
believability is in the little, knowing details - the jock with the Sports
Illustrated football phone, the reference to the 8th grade boyfriend who's into
mythology, the college party goons with the Sharper Image poster on their wall.
  Jawbreaker doesn't have knowing details, because it doesn't know shit. It
presents a crude Pee-Chee doodle of high school culture - you really never get
a feel for the inhabitants of the school or the "cruel politics" of their
world. In fact, you hardly get to know the characters, or the movie itself.
It's a short movie, just over 90 minutes, but it's loaded with flashbacks to
earlier scenes, as if you might have forgotten. It's like an hour long TV
special with commercials. It never really feels like characters or scenes, just
actresses rushing through plot points. 
  Most of the minor characters use an atrocious, sub-Troma style of comedy
acting to deliver lines like "Oh my god! That is soooo cool!" - the kind of
satirical dialogue that was cutting edge in a certain region of California when
these characters were in kindergarten. Today it's not an observation, it's an
echo of a cliché of an out of date observation. There is even a football player
character who seems to be modeled after Kurt from Heathers. Both characters
look way too old to be in high school, and both have 1987 hairdos. The do is
most distracting in the 1999 movie. This character might have seemed a little
out of date when I was in high school, but in a contemporary movie he's
ridiculous.
  Along with the unbelievable high school world comes unbelievable behavior.
You don't believe Julie (Rebecca Gayheart) when she stops hanging out with her
popular, murderer friend and for some reason has to start dressing down. And
you really don't believe Fern's transformation into the popular Vylette. She
goes from mousy, mumbling Carrie White to cocky, talkative valley girl
superbitch (at one point looking like Princess Diana as Amber from Clueless)
and back to shy misfit, without convincing evolution or motivation. You are
never given any reason to relate to her as she covers up the murder in exchange
for fashion tips, but at the end, when she abruptly joins the good guys, it
seems you are supposed to forgive her.
  Heathers isn't a perfect film - its cheesy keyboard scoring has always grated
on my nerves, and many people are driven crazy by Christian Slater's whole Jack
Nicholson shtick. But it helped me get through high school because it so
perfectly reflected how I saw the world at that age. It made me feel like I
wasn't alone. I can't imagine that teens will relate as strongly to Jawbreaker.
Like most of the recent slew of teen movies, it has a weird view of popular
kids vs. social outcasts that doesn't come very close to jibing with reality.
When Fern gets made over as Vylette, the whole school talks about her and
follows her around and applauds her arrival at school as if she were a rock
star. When they find out that she is actually Fern, the quiet girl with the
fake looking wig, they are disappointed and angry, they mob her and chant at
her and hit her until she is bloodied and unconscious and laying on the floor
wrapped in xeroxed photos of her old yearbook photo. It's difficult to relate
to this kind of scene because throughout the horrible history of high school
humiliations on this planet, nothing even remotely similar to this has ever
happened. We can't believe in her rise or her fall - I mean, would anyone
really care? At worst, they'd stop talking to her.
  The obvious model for Jawbreaker, besides Heathers, is Carrie. And as
mentioned earlier, Fern is obviously meant to look like Carrie. But Carrie is a
believable outcast. She doesn't fit in because her mom is a crazy, abusive
zealot; girls pelt her with tampons and pig's blood because she has her period
in the gym shower and doesn't know what's happening to her. They don't
understand Carrie and they hate her for it. But Fern's biggest sin is looking
like Carrie. She's quiet and she's awkward, but she's just not pelting
material.
  There is one enjoyable homage to Carrie: the parents of the dead girl (seen
only for a few seconds) are played by William Kat and PJ Soles. So it's really
piling it on too thick later in the film when a character suggests going to
prom and Fern says, "Oh yeah, why don't we stop by the slaughterhouse and pick
up some pig's blood?" And then it really goes over the line when the climax is
modeled after De Palma's classic bucket of blood sequence, but without the
virtuoso technique or the suspense or the blood or the telekinetic aftermath.
  (There's also what seems to be a Blue Velvet reference - Fern smells a rose
and is horrified when an ugly centipede crawls out of it - but I'm not sure
why.)
  One of the more preposterous scenes has Julie casually telling her new
boyfriend about the murder - only as background information to explain
Vylette's makeover. Suddenly the conversation shifts to righteousness and
"You've got to do something!" and Stein seems to expect us to relate to Julie. 
  Julie decides to turn in Courtney, so she meets with the detective
investigating the case (Pam Grier, who is so likable that I could almost buy a
line like, "Some of the sweetest candies are as sour as death inside" before I
thought, "Wait a minute, Pam, why are you saying these lines? You escaped the
world of Steven Seagal movies for this?"). The detective reveals that there is
a man being held as a suspect in the murder, Julie figures out that Courtney is
framing a stranger, and inexplicably she leaves without telling the detective
the truth. (The suspect is played, briefly, by McGowan's offscreen fiancee,
Marilyn Manson, who looks funny in a mustache. His tiny walk-on must have had
something cut; early publicity was hyping up a "shocking sex act" which as far
as I could tell never materialized. If he ever breaks up with McGowan his
buddies will surely give him shit for being whipped into appearing in such a
lame attempt at a hard-edged black comedy.)
  Later, when Julie finds a recording of Courtney confessing to the murder, she
doesn't bring it to Grier because the plot requires her to instead perform an
uninspired prom prank - the old "play a recording of the villain saying
something self-incriminating while she is making a speech" routine. Of course,
in the world of bad movies, playing the recording over the PA system involves a
complex under-the-clock rewiring rather than just commandeering a microphone.
Worse, the consequences of being proven a murderer in front of an audience are
more like what you'd expect as punishment for a bad standup routine - everyone
calls Courtney a bitch and throws flowers at her. I don't think this is
supposed to be a swipe at the superficiality of high school culture. It's just
another scene that develops Stein's weak motifs at the expense of story and
character. And by this point the film has completely abandoned things like
Fern's opening narration and the implication that she is a lesbian. Shit, says
Stein, these kids grew up on MTV - they won't remember what I showed them 90
minutes ago.
  Jawbreaker is more insidious than other bad teen movies of the '90s because
it purports to be anti-establishment. Whereas Can't Hardly Wait and She's All
That really believed in the teen institutions of Prom Queen and Class President
and Cute Couple and Thrower of Parties, Jawbreaker tries to cast those things
in a wicked light and stand up for the outcasts. But it's empty and out of
touch. It doesn't even pretend that the outcasts are any less hollow than the
cheerleaders. 
  In Scream, Skeet Ulrich reminded everyone of Johnny Depp. Now the actor who
plays Julie's new boyfriend reminds me of Skeet Ulrich. He's a good analogy for
Jawbreaker: a second generation copy of an American original. (Don't apply the
analogy to Christian Slater's Jack Nicholson imitation in Heathers, though -
that would be uh cheating or something.)
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
MY QUITE LENGTHY TAKE ON THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT

  When a variety of credible critics claim that a new horror movie is one of
the scariest they've ever seen, I make plans to see it. That's just how it
works. I love a good horror movie (sometimes even a bad one) and if a movie
really is scary, I want to experience it. However, the film festival and
promotional screening buzz of the Blair Witch Project has grown to such a
deafening roar that it seems inevitable that it won't live up to the hype. "It
couldn't be as scary as The Texas Chain Saw Massacre," I told myself, "But
hopefully it will be good."
  At least in the circles I travel, The Blair Witch Project is easily one of
the most anticipated summer movies of '99. Everyone wants to see if it lives up
to the hype - will it be another out of nowhere, low budget first feature
horror classic, like Night of the Living Dead or Texas Chain Saw Massacre or
The Evil Dead? Artisan Entertainment has cruelly but cleverly used this
anticipation as a promotional gimmick by going ahead and releasing it on a mere
27 screens nationwide. The scene at the Neptune in Seattle is, I would assume,
typical - the box office swarmed all day, every single show selling out hours
in advance, enormous around-the-block lines completely unprecedented for this
one screen, semi-arthouse theater. And while I was waiting in line two hours in
advance for a 9:45 showing, clutching tickets I had bought at 3 in the
afternoon, people would walk by, see the lines and exclaim variations on "This
must be the movie of the summer." No doubt these people will check the movie
out "when the crowds die down" and it's playing in multiplexes.
  Another thing that has apparently helped to promote the film is the "let's
pretend it's real" approach to some of the marketing. I never thought the web
site or other promotional materials were intended to deceive people into
thinking the Blair Witch was real. Nevertheless, I heard the guy behind me in
line telling a long, fanciful story about how the filmmakers were found
dismembered and the footage was buried in someone's backyard and blah blah
blah. Other people were overheard referring to it as a "true story." (I can't
help but suspect that these are the people who will be most disappointed by the
movie. They ought to realize it's a "hoax" as soon as it ends - would a real
snuff film have credits?)
  The premise of the movie, as you surely must know, is that three student
filmmakers venture into the woods to make an amateur documentary about a local
legend involving a witch and a series of child murders. The filmmakers, we are
told by the opening title, disappeared, and one year later their footage was
found. We watch their black and white 16 mm footage and goofing-around digital
video, edited together to tell the story of their experiences getting lost in
the woods.
  Early on, I was skeptical as to whether the found-footage conceit would work.
They interview some locals about the "Blair Witch" legend, and the very first
interview is rather stiff. The director of the film within the film, Heather,
records some narration in a cemetery, and it's almost too bad to be believed.
She changes her accent to sound more serious, and the results are laughable.
(Otherwise, the amateurishness of the documentary-in-progress seems dead on
accurate. I am absolutely positive that the aspiring filmmakers I went to
college with would have taken the same approach - static, black and white 16 mm
for the "scary parts," plus lots of crappy video footage of the filmmakers
hiking and fooling around in the hotel room.)
  But the film quickly won me over, and I found that there were very few
touches that rang false. Almost none of the dialogue seems like it could have
possibly been scripted (apparently, the directors led the actors on sort of a
role-playing scavenger hunt, leading them through the story with a series of
notes). As far as I can tell, most of the characterization is not so much
storytelling as footage of the actual bonding between the actors. They joke
with each other in ways rarely captured on film before - not clever quips, just
the kinds of things people say to each other when they're hanging out together.
One of my favorite such moments is when Michael jokingly reprimands Heather and
Josh for incorrectly referring to the Skipper on Gilligan's Island. "Let's stop
calling him 'The Captain,' you illiterate TV people. It's *the Skipper*."
  What results from this improvisatory technique is perhaps the most realistic
group of protagonists in horror movie history. I can relate to the heroes of
The Texas Chain Saw Massacre or Dawn of the Dead, but not as effortlessly as I
can here. The clever quasi-Method techniques used to get these performances
really help pull you into the movie. These are real people, really reacting -
it's just that what they're reacting to, of course, isn't real. But suspension
of disbelief was not a problem for me. I felt like I really was going to "shoot
doc" with these people, and then getting lost in the woods with them, and then
running blindly through the trees screaming with them.
  One particularly realistic touch is the way the fear slowly builds throughout
the movie. Some horror movies have their protagonists take their situations too
lightly, like when Jennifer Love Hewitt goes tanning shortly after witnessing
murders in I Still Know What You Did Last Summer. But I think most horror
filmmakers, had they made The Blair Witch Project, would have had the
protagonists terrified out of their minds for the last two thirds of the movie,
giving it a melodramatic feel that probably would not have worked. 
  The film, however, allows the characters to feel better when the daylight
comes. They may have witnessed something spooky last night in the dark, but in
the sunny afternoon everything seems safer. They allow themselves to
rationalize what happened, or to put it out of their minds, or to assume that
they can make it out of the woods before darkness hits again. For a long time,
they assume it's just someone trying to scare them, which still scares them
because "something has to be wrong" with someone who would bother to do that.
But as the film progresses, the situation gets worse, the nights get scarier
and the chances of ever finding the edge of the woods begin to seem miniscule.
It's a slow burn. Rather than start out with something scary, then introduce
the characters, then get scary again, The Blair Witch Project starts out funny
and really has to build toward the scary. And it works.
  I don't want to say that The Blair Witch Project is one of the scariest
movies I've ever seen. The more times people say that, the more the
expectations are built, and there will most certainly be people who see it
years later and have heard for so long how scary it is that when they finally
see it, it seems laughable. 
  But the fact is, a movie has never before scared me the way this one did.
Maybe The Shining or The Texas Chain Saw Massacre would have done the trick if
I had seen them for the first time at the right age and in a theater. Or maybe
The Exorcist, had I grown up Catholic. Only time travel will ever settle that.
But when shit went down in the Burkittsville woods, I felt a powerful,
vibrating chill all across my skin - the same feeling you get when you almost
get hit by a car or otherwise feel just a little too close to death. My
girlfriend and I like to watch horror movies together, and she usually squeezes
my hand tight during the scary scenes. This is the first movie that has
prompted her to bite my finger in fear.
  Many hardened skeptics and contrarians are already popping up to claim that
it's all hype, and that the movie actually isn't at all scary. I don't think
many of them could have been at the 9:45 Neptune show, though.
  Throughout the film, people all around me were looking at the film
intellectually, or just not taking it seriously. As the opening text unfolded,
the guy next to me continued a conversation with his girlfriend about some
Buffalo Springfield song that they had been reminded of by one of the trailers.
Later he said out loud, "That's a scary shot," dissecting the movie, probably
an aspiring filmmaker. Even late in the film, when things had gotten real scary
and uncomfortable, the theater would rumble with laughter every time a
character made a semi-amusing comment. It didn't seem like the kind of audience
that could be terrified by a movie.
  But at a certain point late in the movie, when the protagonists stumble upon
a certain thing, I heard an entire packed theater get scared out of their wits.
This is not a sudden jolt or a blunt scare like a dead body or a pool of blood.
It's just the unexpected discovery of something that at this point in the story
makes the audience fear what might happen next. A massive, communal moan of
dread rumbled back and forth between the walls of the theater. You could hear
the entire audience squirm in unison. This is not the "BOO! Made you flinch,"
type of shock that is so prevalent in modern horror films. This is more like
true blue, horrified, horrible, reeling in horror type of horror. I wonder if
this might be the closest I'll get to ever experiencing something like the
terror that people allegedly had when The Exorcist was first released.
  So why is it so scary? It's not virtuoso cinematic technique, or pushing the
boundaries of horror subject matter. I think what the filmmakers did was push
aside most of what they've seen in horror movies and instead try to imagine
what it would really be like in real life. What would really be scary? A guy
with an ax chopping off a guy's head? Yeah, that would be scary. But what about
something more subtle? Like, just hearing footsteps when  you're out where
there shouldn't be people? In a slick studio horror movie, the idea would be
ludicrous. But in a raw, low budget movie that so unerringly captures reality,
it wrenches your stomach.
  What's wrong with today's horror movies, many people have tried to convince
me, is that they show too much, when the real way to make a movie scary is to
leave everything up to the imagination. I think that's overstating the
argument, though. Yes, some of the most horrifying events in, say, Psycho, take
place off screen. You can't really deny that Jaws and Alien wouldn't be less
scary if their respective creatures had much more screen time. And I think it
is notable how many people remember horrendous amounts of blood and bodily
mutilation in The Texas Chain Saw Massacre, even though the actual movie is
virtually bloodless. 
  But just because it works so well in these classics doesn't mean it's the
only legitimate approach to making a horror film. Would Night of the Living
Dead be scarier without the shot of the zombies munching guts? Was I imagining
it when I thought the gruesome bloodletting and eye-munching tarantulas of The
Beyond made my heart beat fast? Would The Exorcist be scarier if we had to
imagine Regan turning her head around?
  I don't think so. But The Blair Witch Project takes the other approach -
leaving it to the imagination - and succeeds tremendously. I am certain that it
will become the most frequently used example of the "tell, don't show"
technique of horror.
  The premise of Blair Witch Project allows a good twist on being Left To The
Imagination (for now on, to be referred to as LTTI). Since the film pretends to
be an attempt to document actual horrific events, the audience is made to feel
like they are examining the footage, squinting at it, trying to find the
evidence in there somewhere. When something happens off screen, you don't
think, "Nice cinematic technique." It's more like, "Damn, they didn't have the
camera on." Like real videos of alleged supernatural phenomenon, the eeriness
of the footage largely lies in how frustratingly incomplete it is. You're
always searching for a quick glimpse of something, somewhere in the frame. In
the instances when you do see something horrifying, the camera is shaky and
unclear enough that it's debatable what you saw. Even the eerie sounds heard in
the night are largely LTTI, because they are covered by the ruffling
microphones and unzipping tents of the terrified film crew.
  I didn't even notice it until after the movie, but I think the lack of music
really helps, and almost falls into the LTTI category. A good score can really
add a lot to a horror film, particularly those of the atmospheric, gothic
variety. There are terrifying movies that don't work at all when viewed without
the music, like (according to John Carpenter) Halloween. But Blair Witch
Project has no music to poke at your emotions, or enhance the creepiness, or
tell you how to feel. The story is left to fend for itself. Even the end
credits, thankfully, don't try to cheer you up or appeal to your sense of irony
with a catchy tune. Instead, they leave you with ambient noises, as if to say,
"Keep thinking about it, sucker. This movie isn't leaving right away."
  So since the movie really does live up to the hype, and since the
overwhelming crowds of the limited release seem to be a genuine phenomenon, I
think it's safe to say that The Blair Witch Project will be a monster hit that
will signal a new era in horror films. Perfect timing, too, because the short
lived Scream cycle seems to be on its last legs. 
  Hugely successful horror films always inspire a slew of half-assed imitators
that miss the point, and a few pretty good ones that don't. It will be
interesting to see how studios and other filmmakers will try to capitalize on
and/or learn from The Blair Witch Project. Here are a few predictions:
1. Much lip service will be given to the LTTI technique. This week, Dreamworks
releases Jan De Bont's effects heavy remake of the LTTI classic The Haunting. I
predict that 75% of all reviews will mention The Blair Witch Project as a
superior alternative, because it doesn't try to show everything. Perhaps some
of the next slew of horror films will put more thought into the ancient art of
making the audience fear what they might see, instead of what they do see.
2. One or two studios will try picking up low budget supernatural horror movies
by unknown directors. They will be met with much less enthusiasm than The Blair
Witch Project.
3. Someone will try making a movie with a Scream style, plucked-from-TV cast
encountering a supernatural horror in the woods. The trades will call it "The
Blair Witch Project meets Scream."
4. I fear that particularly unimaginative filmmakers will try copying the
mockumentary angle. Blair Witch Project isn't the first horror movie to do
this, but another horror mockumentary inspired by its success would still count
as a rip off. Other filmmakers will have trouble duplicating the realism of
Blair Witch Project.
5. Hopefully, the movie's success will inspire filmmakers to think about what
really is scary, rather than what is traditionally used to scare people in
horror films. They will probe their own fears and try to figure out how to
depict them realistically on film. I don't think they should abandon the use of
extravagant visual effects, but it should free them up to realize that
audiences don't need them.
A postscript concerning The Blair Witch Project and my precious Texas Chain Saw
Massacre:
  Although the films are very different from each other, it is my belief that
BWP was heavily influenced by 'Saw, from the opening text implying (but not
outright stating) that the story is true, to certain witchly artifacts
reminiscent of the dangling bone ornaments in 'Saw, to the ambiguous marketing
which has confused people into believing BWP is a true story. There are still
many people who mistakenly believe 'Saw is based on a true story (Ed Gein, who
didn't live in Texas and had no chainsaw to massacre with, doesn't count). 
  After 'Saw, director Tobe Hooper went on to make one unacknowledged classic
(The Texas Chainsaw Massacre Part 2), one above average sleaze thriller (The
Funhouse), and one mainstream success that most people credit to Steven
Spielberg (Poltergeist). Most of the rest of his output has been either
substandard horror with limited appeal (Eaten Alive), or unmitigated crap
(Spontaneous Combustion, The Mangler). I still hope he will someday recapture
the demented magic of his two 'Saw films, but most write him off as the
director of a fluke one-off.
  I hope Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sánchez, the creators of The Blair Witch
Project, don't suffer the Curse of Tobe Hooper. So far, the odds seem against
them. Much of the strength of BWP lies in the mockumentary gimmick, which one
would hope they won't repeat. But we don't know if these guys know anything
about other forms of cinematic storytelling, or directing scripted actors, or
even writing dialogue.
  On the other hand, we do know that these are clever guys who came up with an
original way to film an extremely effective horror movie. Here's hoping they
have more tricks up their sleeves.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Wild Wild West (1999)
   A lot of people had it in for Wild Wild West the minute they saw the first
trailer. They didn't like the western meets Jules Verne gimmickry. They assumed
the horrible Will Smith-ization of the Stevie Wonder classic "I Wish" was
representative of the film's score. And many white people had the ludicrous
complaint that a black man can't play a government agent in the 1860s, even in
a comedy-fantasy where his mission is to stop a legless supervillain in an
80-foot mechanical tarantula from assassinating President Grant.
  I had high hopes, though. There are two types of people in this world: those
who think giant steam powered robotic spiders are stupid, and those who don't.
I am most certainly in the latter category, and proud of it. I have never quite
accepted Will Smith as an actor, despite his pretty good performance in Six
Degrees of Separation. His poor comic timing and self-conscious "I'm being
funny right now" delivery has always bothered me in his comedies and action
films. With the Wild Wild West trailer, I thought I might be seeing a new, more
refined Will Smith, whose delivery matches his charisma.
  But I was wrong. Will Smith continues his tradition of ruining any good lines
he has. When he finds something that is funny (like his lines about a "white
woman's boobies") he can't help but repeat it several times until you want to
tell him, "Okay, I thought it was funny for a second there, but it's done now.
Knock it off." And then he keeps going until you want to say, "What did I tell
you? It's not funny anymore. God damn it, would you stop it?" Some lines are
mildly amusing, but you still can't help but wish they were delivered by
someone else. At one point, he confronts some evil henchmen aboard the robotic
tarantula, and claims that he's there to deliver a telegram to the sinister Dr.
Loveless from his mama. It's obviously meant to have a young Eddie Murphy con
man type of feel to it, but Smith doesn't have the acting chops to sell a line
like this. If it were Chris Tucker, you'd believe that West really wants these
henchmen to believe his pathetic lie. With Smith you just think, "Oh, that
would have been a pretty funny line in a better movie."
  Smith's collaborator, director Barry Sonnenfeld, has not only not improved,
but has gone downhill. One thing about Sonnenfeld is that he's never been as
funny in his movies as he seems to be in real life. A Sonnenfeld interview is
always a hilarious and entertaining freak show spectacular. Sonnenfeld either
is, or wants us to believe that he is, a ridiculously neurotic lunatic
terrorized by his status as a successful Hollywood director. On set, he is said
to dress in the same style as his film's protagonists, defer creative decisions
to his wife "Sweetie," and frequently start bawling when a scene doesn't work.
On the set of Wild Wild West he allegedly collapsed in the grass and tearfully
told Smith that his wife was dying of brain cancer. Later he realized that he
was just feeling depressed because he was hungry. On Men In Black, he wore a
tie that was too long and accidentally wiped his ass with it.
   Another thing about Sonnenfeld is that his movies tend to seem funnier at
the time. Upon release, The Addams Family seemed like a delightfully faithful
in-the-flesh re-creation of Charles Addams' morbid cartoons. Now the novelty
has worn off, it doesn't have enough jokes and it comes off rather dull. At the
time, Addams Family Values seemed like a much funnier, more satirical take on
the characters. Now it seems too broad and obvious. Sonnenfeld is not as
imaginative or skillful as other cartoonish directors like Tim Burton, and he's
not nearly as clever as his former collaborators the Coen Brothers (for whom he
was a director of photography). But he's delivered some enjoyable trifles, Get
Shorty was a good film, and he produced the definitive Elmore Leonard movie Out
of Sight. I've always thought of him as one of the good guys. Not a genius, but
with his heart in the right place.
  With Wild Wild West, Sonnenfeld seems to be closer to the fake-eccentric
commercial hack that some have made him out to be than the above-average
goofball entertainer I like to think of him as. The former camera virtuoso has
grown  Michael-Bay-incoherent in his cinematic storytelling. I came out with a
long list of story points I hadn't followed: How did the metal plate guy get
electrocuted? Who was the dead guy hanging from the chain? How did they figure
out that Artemus was not the real president? When did they save the scientist,
Mr. Escobar? What did they plan to do with the flying machine before M. Emmett
Walsh offered them explosives?
  These things and others are unclear, while other story points are
embarrassingly over-explained. We don't really need Artemus to point out that
he got his attack strategy when he saw a bee kill a tarantula in the desert -
we figured out the significance of that as soon as we saw it. When Jim West
gets shot point blank and falls to the ground, we don't need to have a long
stare at him laying as if dead, then slowly waking up, then slowly opening his
jacket, then slowly discovering that the bullet has been stopped by Artemus'
chain mail vest. Again, we knew this was going to happen as soon as we first
spotted the invention.
  Men In Black had a lot of enjoyable alien gimmickry - aliens inside dogs,
aliens inside people's heads, tentacled alien babies whacking Will Smith real
hard against the top of a car. In the end, it felt like too many of these
gimmicks had been given away in the trailers, and if there had only been a
little bit more, it would have worked a lot better. But Wild Wild West makes
you yearn for the not-quite-full feel of Men In Black. There are a few great
gimmicks - the tarantula, assassins hiding inside paintings, a projector hooked
up to a severed head to reveal the last image it saw. But that's about it. 
  Men In Black was also hurt by Smith's poorly delivered punchlines, which
never quite worked for me. But the film was anchored by Tommy Lee Jones, who
played the material straight like it obviously needed to be played. Here, no
one plays it straight enough. Kevin Kline is introduced to us in a long,
painfully unfunny scene in which he dresses as a woman and attracts many sleazy
men by speaking in a Miss Piggy voice. Astonishingly, the filmmakers chose to
repeat this routine in another, even more embarrassing scene with Smith wearing
the fake tits.
  Kenneth Branagh doesn't help anything with his over-the-top, hammy
performance as the villain, Dr. Arliss Loveless. The best way to describe the
character is to explain that at one point he yells, "Let the party begin!" You
know the type, like Tommy Lee Jones or Jim Carrey in Batman Forever. The kind
of villain who talks really loud, delighting in his own accent, but never
inspiring fear or amusement. The type of villain you never want to invite to
your multiplex again.
    Salma Hayek is utterly wasted as Rita, a woman who comes along for the ride
in order to come along for the ride? This is an actress who has become a near
legend just by dancing with a snake in one scene of a mildly-popular vampire
flick. And somehow, they've made her the least memorable female lead in recent
Hollywood history. I saw the movie yesterday and I can't even remember anything
she did in it. In fact, the only characters I really liked much were Dr.
Loveless' henchwomen, who are played by supermodels and have names like Munitia
and Lipreada. They're the only characters who seem to be simplistic on purpose.
 The media and newsgroup writers have been making a big deal about Wild Wild
West's disappointing box office numbers. I hope the suits don't blame it on the
subject matter, but instead see that even big summer movies need to be handled
with some precision and some wit. For a while it seemed like audiences would
bend over for any well marketed piece of shit, with the standards getting lower
all the time. Witness the astounding success of Batman Forever, Independence
Day and Armageddon. I know things will never turn the way I want them to, where
disposable, pre-fabricated blockbusters are given the cold shoulder and more
imaginative movies like, say, Babe: Pig in the City and Rushmore are seen and
enjoyed by millions. Still, when mainstream audiences share my disgust with a
Godzilla or a Wild Wild West, it makes the world feel a little happier, a
little more unified.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Election (1999)
 Upon the release of virtually every high school related movie of the past few
years (Can't Hardly Wait, She's All That, Varsity Blues, Jawbreaker, etc.) one
sound could be heard: me, whining about high school movies that seem to be made
by people who were home schooled. Sometimes it's amusing to see how filmmakers
view today's teenagers - the writers of Never Been Kissed, for example, seem to
think that high school kids idolize Tiger Woods - but it gets old fast, and you
start yearning for a movie that captures the daily rituals and heightened
emotional traumas of high school in a semi-accurate fashion.  
  Election does that and more. It's really not a teen movie, as it takes on the
point of view of Mr. McAllister (Mathew Broderick, playing his first neurotic
teacher role to perfection) and follows him into his home life, outside of the
world of lockers and notebooks. But it is perhaps one of the most accurate film
depictions ever of a suburban public high school.
   Let's compare Election to She's All That, the Freddie Prinze, Jr. movie
about giving a makeover to a good looking unpopular girl to make her into a
good looking popular girl. In She's All That, the class president is the most
popular guy in school. The office is one of great power -  in one scene, he
asks two bullies to eat pizza covered in their own pubic hairs, and they have
no choice but to do it.  
  Election is different, because it takes into account things like reality and
common sense. In this school, few really care about class elections. Initially,
the sweater wearing, hyper-ambitious Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon) runs
unopposed. Because really, who cares about student government besides Tracy
Flick, who likes to collect good lines to put on her resume? Another late
entering candidate points out in her speech the obvious fact that student
government is really a pointless exercise with no power of any kind. Even Mr.
M, who at least cares enough about the election to manipulate its outcome,
snaps at one point, "We're not electing the fucking Pope." 
  This is a movie that remembers that student government is not a popularity
contest. Because how many popular kids want to be in student government? When
Mr. M tries to recruit the popular, injured football player Paul Metzler to run
against Tracy, he points out that it's more Tracy Flick's kind of thing. 
  There are no bully cliches, intense prom queen races or Clueless rip offs. At
long last, a high school movie that treats the audience like people who may
have once experienced the real thing. Who would have thought that Miramax would
bring us She's All That, while MTV brought us Election?
  The director is Alexander Payne, who also helmed Citizen Ruth, the funniest
movie ever made about abortion. In that film, Laura Dern plays a glue sniffing
pregnant woman caught in a tug of war between anti-abortion and pro-choice
activists. The film ruthlessly satirizes both sides, not letting anyone off
easy - kind of like Dead Man Walking with laffs. Election has a similar
sensibility, setting you up to side with Mr. M only to later realize that he's
much, much more flawed than his arch-nemesis. There's a lot of grey area, very
little black and white, and the movie asks you to make up your own mind about
the characters and what they're doing. It hardly even nudges you. 
  Payne doesn't pretend that the election or its outcome are important. To Mr.
M, Tracy losing the election would be a symbolic victory over people who
trample over others to get to the top. But it is clear that his quest is more
fueled by sexual fear - his old best friend lost his job and marriage after
becoming sexually obsessed (and involved) with Tracy. Tracy mentions to Mr. M
that if she wins they'll be spending a lot of time together, and he starts to
see some of his buddy's desire in himself. 
  It is in this aspect, and in a subplot about an extramarital affair, that the
film is most daring. The camera seems to scrutinize Mr. M, magnifying his
flaws, both humanizing and humiliating him. It never comes across as forced
shock value, but it's still uncomfortable subject matter. Here we have one of
the school's best loved teachers, in many ways an admirable man, watching a
porn video about cheerleaders, and later picturing Tracy's face on the back of
his wife's head as he has doggystyle sex. I like it when a movie can make me
cringe intentionally, like when Mr. M mistakes a woman's friendship for sexual
advances and playfully suggests getting a room as they drive past a hotel. And
I can think of few moments in movies that are as embarrassingly human as the
one where he squats down in a hotel bathroom, still wearing a shirt and tie,
cleaning his crotch before a planned sexual liaison.
  Another thing that makes it work is that while Tracy is ostensibly the
villain, and her characterization is a humorous semi-exaggeration of annoying
personality traits that we all recognize, she is never demonized. In fact, the
worst thing Tracy ever does is tear down her opponent's campaign posters in a
fit of rage, and then lie about it. When it comes down to it, poster
desecration is fairly small potatoes in the annals of movie villainy.
  In any other movie, Tracy would be an outwardly wholesome person with a
secret dark side, like Serial Mom, or Nicole Kidman in To Die For, or Patricia
Arquette in the more forgettable Goodbye Lover. But outside of poster-tearing,
Tracy has no dark side. She's not a femme fatale or a seductress, and in fact
is portrayed as a victim during her relationship with Mr. M's colleague. Later,
you can't help but feel for her when she lays on her bed crying, having lost
the election, and her mom tries to console her by gently intoning, "Maybe if
you had tried some of my suggestions."
  Paul is a similarly moldbreaking character. In my experience, high school
athletes often were cruel and misogynistic brutes, more extreme even than how
they are portrayed in movies, but not all of them were. Paul (who bears a
striking resemblance to Keanu Reeves) is hilariously dim-witted, but he's the
most genuinely nice person in the movie. He reminds me of people from my high
school, and doesn't remind me of characters from other movies. His hilariously
bad campaign speech made my eyes water. I felt like I should stifle my
laughter, as if I was sitting in those bleachers and he might see me making fun
of him.
  Election is the type of movie where you keep seeing little details that make
you think, "That happens all the time in real life - how come I've never seen
it in a movie?" I like the corny painted-on-butcher-paper campaign posters
("Paul Metzler - You betzler!"), and Tracy's obsession with taping them up
neatly. I like that while Tracy makes her speech, one student in the bleachers
yells out an unrelated obscenity, causing everyone to laugh, which in turn
causes the principal to commandeer the microphone and scold the school for not
"acting like adults." 
  I like that the lesbian characters look like regular people - they're not
exaggeratedly sexy or butch. In fact, all of the casting is amazingly true to
life, from Mr. M's not-particularly-attractive mistress to the two kids who,
for some reason, pride themselves on accurate ballot counting.
  The cars are realistic, the houses are realistic, the hair is realistic. You
feel like you're spying on one of your teachers from high school more than you
feel like you're watching a movie. I read somewhere that Payne hadn't seen very
many teen movies before, and I believe it. He seems unaware of the low
standards that are considered acceptable in the genre.
  In the epilogue, there is a brief scene where Tracy finds out that college
life isn't quite what her mom and her teachers and the brochures made it out to
be. While she tries to sleep, four perfectly cast, frizzy haired dorm neighbors
sit on the floor outside of her door, talking. Tracy probably realizes that
these guys were able to get into college without super-charged resumes, and it
pisses her off. Moments of dead-on accuracy like this are rare in movies about
young people (especially those brought to us by MTV, which include Dead Man On
Campus and Varsity Blues), but Election is absolutely loaded with them.
  There are a few similarities with Rushmore, one of my other favorite movies
I've seen this year, but in a way they're opposites. Max Fischer and Tracy
Flick are almost the same character type, dominating virtually every school
activity, masterfully manipulating every school resource available to them -
they even both take on unhealthy relationships with teachers. But Max is
portrayed as the hero, while Tracy acts as a quasi-villain, and Election has an
overwhelmingly pessimistic view while Rushmore ends optimistically. 
  Election makes a good companion piece to both Rushmore and Citizen Ruth, and
acts as a powerful antidote to the many brainless teen movies where the last
act takes place at a big dance, game or party. This is the high school movie
I've been waiting for, the one with no makeovers or in-school radio stations,
that doesn't feel like the son of the son of the son of whichever John Hughes
movie. This is the one that could have happened in my school, the one that
hacks off a piece of real life and puts it in a magnifying jar so we can all
watch it wiggle around.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for From Dusk Till Dawn 2: Texas Blood Money (1999) (V)
TEXAS BLOOD MONEY: FROM DUSK TILL DAWN 2
  I have just seen the straight to video sequel to From Dusk Till Dawn and I
enjoyed it quite a bit. It has a definite straight to video feel to it (perhaps
because it was filmed in South Africa) but also transcends the genre and will
probably become a minor cult favorite in its own right. 
  I am a fan of the original film although I consider it highly flawed. I think
the first half is great and I love the idea of a bank robber movie that
completely out of the blue turns into a vampire movie. Unfortunately, since the
second half is really a whole different movie, it ends up feeling abrupt when
it ends, like you've only seen one half of a vampire movie. I love the scene
where they emerge from the Titty Twister into the sun ("What were they?
Psychos?") but I still feel a little ripped off - I ought to feel exhausted,
like they really were in there from dusk till dawn. I ought to feel the way I
do at the end of the Evil Dead movies or Dawn of the Dead. But I just don't.
For all the amusing bits in the vampire portion of the movie, it just doesn't
come together smoothly and doesn't work either as a solid horror movie or as a
perfect horror comedy like Evil Dead 2 or An American Werewolf in London. And
the more comedic tone of the vampire section seems to betray some of the
serious themes that were brought up in the first half.
  Texas Blood Money doesn't have the same vivid photography and atmosphere as
Rodriguez's film, and it doesn't have as good of a cast. Robert Patrick, Brett
Harrelson, Muse Watson, Duane Whitaker and Bo Hopkins *sounds* like a good cast
to me, and they are adequate, but you can't help but notice that they don't
have that powerful badass presence that Clooney and some of his co-stars
(particularly Fred Williamson and Tom Savini) had in the original. I was
disappointed that Harrelson's acting was weak, after having really liked him in
The People vs. Larry Flynt. There he was as convincingly and likably dim as his
real life brother Woody. Here he forces wide eyed naivete and reminds me of the
young guy in the remake of Night of the Living Dead. 
  This sequel also suffers from some cheesy Full Moon Video style keyboard
scoring (although some of the music mimics Rodriguez's soundtrack style, even
using a different version of a song that was used in Desperado). I think a real
orchestral score would have improved the film immensely. It's hard to think of
something as horrific when accompanied by a keyboard trying to sound like
violins.
  The creepy, organic textures of Rodriguez's sets have been lost, and clearly
the original Titty Twister set no longer exists. On the exterior we only see
the sign, and the interior is a biker bar decked out in hubcaps and pink
insulation. It doesn't have the epic decadence of the original bar, which was
like an Aztec temple designed by a rock 'n roll Caligula.
  But that's the bad news. The good news is that the sequel is more
over-the-top and constantly inventive than the original. The film is directed
and co-written by Scott Spiegel, best known as the co-writer of Evil Dead 2,
and it shows. Spiegel doesn't have as strong of a visual sense as his pal Sam
Raimi, but it has certainly improved since his previous films. Texas Blood
Money takes camera gimmicks to a hilariously excessive level. This film has
bat-cams, mouth-cams, skull-cams, a pushup-cam, a rotating-fan-cam, a
spinning-combination-lock-cam, even a
pipe-impaling-a-vampire-played-by-famous-rapper-Yoyo-cam. 
  The fight scenes are full of the vampire super strength we saw a little of in
the original, allowing for many people to get socked and fly through the air.
Vampires throw people through windows and kick cars across streets. Sometimes
vampire powers aren't even necessary, since there are some explosions and
gunshots that also send people flying like missiles. I love over-the-top
touches like the scene where a vampire tosses a cop off the roof, causing him
to be shocked by powerlines, then bounce through the air and come crashing down
on top of a car. Then there is the scene where a SWAT team storms the bank
off-camera. We hear gunshots and screams, followed by silence, and then a
severed head comes flying out the door and splats against a wall across the
street.
  There are also occasional funny dialogue bits that may or may not have been
supervised by producer Quentin Tarantino. (The script is by Spiegel and Duane
Whitaker from a story by Spiegel and Boaz Yakin [of Fresh fame], but Tarantino
is said to have had input.) I like the scene where the gang waits in a hotel
room watching a "fuck movie" and discussing whether or not it is legitimate to
criticize a porn film for having a weak story. "You know what's wrong with this
movie," asserts Muse Watson thoughtfully. "We've been watching it for a good
half hour and there's been no ass fucking."
  Speaking of fucking, even the fucking in this movie is over-the-top, with
Raymond Cruz's character Jesus apparently going for some sort of bouncing
record. This scene seems to exist solely to set up a pretty well done variation
on the Psycho shower scene, with a little bat playing the part of Mother. And
the shower scene itself is a set up for the best bad pun I've heard in a while:
"It looks like a real bloodbath," says one cop surveying the blood-drenched
tub.
  If you like that kind of thing, you might want to check out this movie. And
if you don't like that kind of thing, what the hell is wrong with you?
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Detroit Rock City (1999)
I was born in 1975 - the same year, I've been told, that the KISS
legend began. Being a mere zero years old at the time, I had trouble
really appreciating their makeup and pyrotechnics and platform snake
boots. So I am not of the KISS generation. Sure, I know a few people
my age who had KISS lunch boxes when they were little, but I'm not
sure how they knew about them. My most vivid KISS memory is of the
time they decided to take off the makeup. So like much of '70s pop
culture, what little I know about KISS comes through beach towels and
trading cards and beat up plastic dolls at antique malls.
But I still loved DETROIT ROCK CITY, the new comedy about four stoned
teenagers in 1978 overcoming great opposition to see KISS play live in
Detroit.  As far as my born-too-late-to-really-be-sure eyes can tell,
the opening credits are the most accurate cinematic depiction to date
of the appeal of '70s pop culture. Vivid closeups of merchandise and
publicity stills take you on an epic rollercoaster ride through the
land of Fonz and Hulk. Newspaper articles and fuzzy radio reports
document the larger than life, comic book iconography of KISS. The
time and place are set, and the movie never falters or steps out of
character. You are in 1978, and you understand KISS.
Crucial to the movie's success is its dedication to the attitudes of
archaic teen genres of the past. This is more like ROCK N ROLL HIGH
SCHOOL than anything after FAST TIMES AT RIDGMONT HIGH. It seems odd
that Paul Bartel doesn't make an appearance. From beginning to end,
the characters find over-the-top ways to outrage the authorities, or
to fulfill revenge fantasies.  Girl's restrooms are defiled, lifelong
crushes are consummated, bullies and car thieves are defeated or
attacked by dogs.  Modern teen movies often contain preposterous
stick-it-to-the-man scenarios, and they don't work. Take, for example,
the scene in SHE'S ALL THAT where Freddy Prinze, Jr. just has to ask
and two bullies eat pubic-hair pizza in front of the whole school. In
the context of a modern teen film, these scenes are embarrassing -
they clash with reality on about 17 different levels. Do the
filmmakers know how ludicrous these situations are? It doesn't seem
like it.  They seem to be trying to make something that modern teens
can relate to.  DETROIT ROCK CITY, though, takes a postmodernist
approach, so you know that it's supposed to be absurd when Eddie
Furlong, performing for middle aged women at a strip club, fills an
entire beer pitcher with vomit and manages to arouse the crowd
anyway. And you can laugh at the fantasy fulfillment of Furlong (who,
by the way, still has cheese in his hair from an earlier incident)
then being paid to have sex with erotic thriller queen Shannon Tweed.
A word about vomit: because of the aforementioned scene, clueless
critics will no doubt describe the humor as "grossout" and compare it
to THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY and AMERICAN PIE. But this is just one
disgusting gag in the context of a deeply funny movie. It doesn't come
across as a set-piece which other scenes are building toward or pale
in comparison to. It also has a precedent in the work of director Adam
Rifkin. In the obscure and underrated black comedy gem THE DARK
BACKWARD, one of Bill Paxton's many vile hobbies is showing off to
women by eating disgusting combinations rotten food.  A lot of the
humor also comes from the stylistic indulgences, beginning right off
the bat with an electric guitar version of the New Line Cinema
fanfare.  Rifkin loads the movie with goofy camera movements and
absurd period details (like Stretch Armstrong being used as a
weapon). Also of note is the score by J. Peter Robinson, which
attempts to elevate a scene of burning KISS tickets to the level of
unspeakable tragedy.  This is by far Rifkin's most masterful
directorial work to date. He crafts what could be limp material for
maximum laugh power. The tone of the pre-credits sequence reminds me
of the Drew Barrymore opening in SCREAM. The scene involves the mother
of one of the KISS-loving protagonists, played to perfection by Lynn
Shaye (who was indelibly burned upon my memory in KINGPIN when she
asked Woody Harrelson, "What is it about great sex that makes me have
to crap?"). Home alone at night, she pours herself a drink, lights a
cigarette, and chooses a Carpenter's record to put on and kick back in
her recliner. The atmosphere is tense, but Shaye doesn't get attacked
by a slasher - instead she's attacked by the quasi-outrageous rock 'n
roll of KISS, whose record apparently was hidden inside the
Carpenters' sleeve.  Shaye's character is the primary villain of the
piece, destroying the kids' tickets and dogging their quest every step
of the way, even leading a Mothers Against the Music of KISS
rally. The satanic threat of KISS seems quaint and silly by today's
standards, so the outrage they cause is almost cute. As a result,
DETROIT ROCK CITY joins SOUTH PARK and SUMMER OF SAM as this summer's
accidentally topical films after the censorial hysteria caused by the
Columbine high school shootings.  The large cast is uniformly
great. Sam Huntington is particularly likeable as Shaye's hapless son,
who is emasculated by being forced to wear brand new K-Mart clothes to
school. There are also small supporting roles for Natasha Lyonne and
Melanie Lynskey (the less famous HEAVENLY CREATURE, but the one
everyone likes the best).
I think part of the reason these characters are likable is the same
reason they're funny: they worship KISS. It's obviously corny and it
gets a lot of laughs on that level, but it's also something that can
be easily related to. I think most interesting people have had
something like KISS at some time in their life. For me it's KISS
label-mates Parliament, for some people it might be a TV show or a
movie star. You can almost join in their very genuine enthusiasm when
they scream and jump up and down and high five each other as they take
an elevator up to a radio station thinking their going to collect KISS
tickets. And you can also laugh knowingly as they go back down
ticketless, their shoulders slumped, the elevator music blaring, "If
you like pina colada"
This is a really well made movie. I'm a big fan of THE DARK BACKWARD,
and I also really liked MOUSEHUNT (which Rifkin wrote). But I'm still
surprised what a solid movie this is. I think it's the best comedy of
the summer. I can only imagine what a blast it would be if I happened
to have grown up a KISS fan.
"I would like to thank all the rappers I influenced and helped out on their
albums by giving them the inspiration to use my concepts." --Kool Keith, Black
Elvis liner notes

Title
Review for She's All That (1999)
For me, the problem with a movie like She's All That is not that it's about
high school kids and revolves around events like The Prom, which in real life
most people I've come across never really cared much about. It's not even that
the plot involves a Most Popular Guy In School who makes a bet that he can turn
the Misfit Girl With Glasses into a prom queen, but then she takes off her
glasses and turns out to be beautiful and then he falls in love with her for
real and then he doesn't know what to do about the bet and can he really be
honest with her and oh what a horrible dilemma. My problem with this and many
other teen movies is that as far as I can tell it is written by someone who
never went to high school and also has had very little experience in everyday
situations with humans. 
I can accept that not all high school experiences are going to be like mine,
and maybe there are schools out there where everyone knows who's rich and who's
not and what occupation everyone else's parents have. And maybe at some schools
the class president really is the prize catch and the most popular guy in
school, instead of some guy who wears a tie and quotes Saturday Night Live
skits all the time and spends most of his time consorting with the faculty
about student government type stuff that will never have any effect on anyone
or anything, ever. There may even be a high school somewhere that has a radio
station broadcast over its intercom system with a student (in this case, Usher)
who never has to go to class because he is always spinning records and doing
gossipy shout-outs ala The Love Daddy in Do the Right Thing.
But I can't accept scenes like the one where Class President finds two bullies
(one of whom appears to be at least 32 years old) putting pubic hair on another
kid's pizza. Without even a threat of violence, he tells the bullies that they
are going to eat the pizza themselves. Apparently having no other choice, the
two swallow their pride and swallow the pubes in front of the entire cafeteria.
I don't think this was supposed to be a Jedi mind trick, or an exaggeration of
the Mighty Power of the Student Government. Perhaps it was an attempt at a
Farrellian over-the-top grossout scene. Whatever it's supposed to be, it does
not follow any laws of reality, heightened reality or satire that I'm aware. It
just makes no god damned sense. It's hard to get a kick out of Mr. President
standing up for the little guy when all you can think is that even if these two
overaged bullies couldn't beat the holy living crap out of the President, they
could definitely laugh in his face and walk away.
I also can't accept what happens when the life long best friend of the All That
Girl of the title finds out that All That Girl's date is secretly using her for
sex. He runs right past his endangered best friend and instead tries to warn
the class president, who he doesn't even know. There are many scenes like this
- one involving All That Girl abandoning a customer at her wacky theme
restaurant of employment and having a long talk with the Class President
character who she hasn't even established a relationship with yet - and for me
anyway they are painful to watch. I'm not talking about little things like in
Varsity Blues when Billy Bob the Wacky Fat Guy has a heart-to-heart with Dawson
and by the next morning at school has somehow obtained a cat scan without an
appointment - I'm talking about complete disregard for realistic human
behavior. Watching these unbelievable characters avoid the obvious behaviors of
reasonable human beings is like one of those dreams where you keep trying to
find a place but every time you turn a corner or open a door you are further
away than before.
A problem that occasionally pervades the movie that is more common for its
genre (especially the TV show Dawson's Creek) is a preposterous amount of self
awareness that, again, doesn't match up with the way we know human beings
really act and think. I don't know if I can ever take another scene like the
one in She's All That where the Most Popular Girl In School (who no one likes)
arrogantly boasts that she will be elected Prom Queen because (what the fuck!?)
her mom and cousin were Prom Queens. Not only do I not believe that people
really think of themselves as the most powerful and popular girl in school, but
I also don't believe that there is any high school anywhere where the other
students are aware of and/or care in any way that so and so's mother was a Prom
Queen in 1971. This kind of moronic shit is inexcusable. I want an apology and
an explanation. Now. 
This movie also has unusually bad characterization for its genre. I'm sure
you're supposed to like the characters and give something approaching a rat's
ass about their problems. But the All That Girl is introduced as someone who
constantly interrupts others to spout cliches about pollution and third world
countries, and who spends her free time doing Movie Style Performance Art with
two dwarves and a guy in his underwear. The performance art scene is
particularly painful. It's done in that same style you've seen a million times
where you know it's not at all like real performance art (I mentioned the
dwarves, right?). But it goes on for a good minute or two, and it's not funny,
and then when All That Girl turns out to be a part of the troupe, it's hard to
tell whether it was a really unfunny parody of bad performance art or a really
bad imitation of good performance art. Class President, for his part, calls it
"really, really good," and he seems sincere. But watching the scene feels like
watching a really bad open mic night and trying not to be rude, and then it
feels like sort of a betrayal when you realize that the scene was not supposed
to be interminable.
Sarah Michelle Gellar does a brief, uncredited sit-on, apparently continuing
her struggle to not let her work on Buffy the Vampire Slayer typecast her as
someone who only appears in really good stuff. Also slumming is Anna Paquin,
who I didn't even recognize as the little sister/makeover artist. In retrospect
I'm very impressed by her American accent, but she sure had more to work with
in that surprisingly good goose movie.
She's All That makes the atrocious Can't Hardly Wait look powerful and
emotionally resonant, but I won't try to claim that my generation had better
teen movies, or today's teens are idiots who like crap, or any such nonsense.
Filmmakers have made crap for teens for as long as there have been filmmakers
who make crap. Movies like Pump Up the Volume may have been closer to my world
view than these prom-queen-centric movies, but they were just as insane in
their depiction of reality. (Every social clique in the group rallies behind
the eccentric pirate radio misfit to overcome the pure unadulterated evil of
the grownups. Yeah, I wish.) At least these kids have Clueless, and there
haven't been any Licensed To Drive type movies lately. More importantly, it
would be a bad idea to wish today's filmmakers would try to learn from the teen
movies that I most cherish, because that may be what leads to upcoming films
like Carrie 2: The Sequel That Proves There Is No God and Jawbreaker (whose
writer-director has clearly seen Heathers as many times as I have). 
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for Iron Giant, The (1999)
  Despite the decade's reputation for depravity and lowest common denominator
crappiness, the 90's have actually produced a whole slew of intelligent and
superbly crafted family films. From wickedly imaginative fantasies like The
Nightmare Before Christmas and James and the Giant Peach to more down to earth
dramas like Harriet the Spy and Fly Away Home, a wide range of high quality
films have brightened up what might otherwise be known as the John Hughes
kicked-in-the-balls period. Now there's a new movie to add to the modern family
classics category, a movie that will also take its place among the best all
around films of the '90s and the greatest animated features ever made. And to
my delight, this movie happens to be about a giant robot.
  Iron Giant delivers as a giant robot film, depicting all manner of robotic
adventure for its wonderful, retro-styled title automaton. You get to see the
robot flying, fighting, carrying people, shooting beams out of its eyes -
everything you'd expect. But for this film, that stuff is only the surface -
even if it doesn't need to be. Most likely, Iron Giant is not what you expect.
It could easily join Toy Story and Babe in a trilogy of warm, compassionate
fairy tales with universal appeal. Like its predecessors, Iron Giant is a
nearly flawless masterpiece of cinematic storytelling. The basic premise - boy
befriends giant robot from space - is an old one, but it comes out feeling like
something entirely unique. It is fortified with healthy doses of humor and
invention that will appeal to adults even more than to children. At the sneak
preview screening I attended, the audience was mostly made up of adults who
seemed to think they were just treating their small children to the latest
kiddy flick. They ended up laughing loud and hard from beginning to end. 
  Most importantly, Iron Giant continues the Toy Story/Babe tradition by
instilling a strong sense of humanity and emotion into a character we wouldn't
have imagined could be so moving. I never in a million years would have
expected to care about a talking pig the way I do Babe, so that was one of that
film's most surprising qualities. It also seems a bit odd to get tingles from a
clunky action figure of a spaceman super hero, but that's just what happens
when I watch Buzz Lightyear realize he's only a toy and try to fly anyway. 
  I did expect to like the giant robot of Iron Giant, because I'm the sort of
guy who likes that sort of thing. But I couldn't have hoped for such a moving,
Frankenstein's-monster-like personality inside this cool-looking mass of metal.
All of the characters, even the humorously xenophobic villain, have enough
dimension and humanity to them to make the story inescapably compelling. At one
point in the movie it occurred to me that the giant might live out a certain
tragic tradition of giant robot stories, and suddenly I found myself crying.
Now that I didn't expect.
  Unlike recent non-Disney hits like Anastasia and Prince of Egypt, it's
actually difficult to think of Iron Giant (which was produced by Warner
Brothers) in terms of Disney animation. Despite being an all ages animated
fable, Iron Giant is a completely different animal. I like Tarzan, and the way
it sticks its toes just a little bit outside the borders of the Disney formula.
I think it is more dramatic and emotional than most Disney films, and I
appreciate the lack of musical sequences. When compared to Iron Giant, though,
Tarzan seems laughable and by-the-numbers. Iron Giant doesn't skewer animation
tradition, but it doesn't follow formula at the expense of story. You don't get
the feeling that this is a commercial endeavor, where merchandising and
marketability are first or even second priorities. They're not even a factor at
all. This is just good old fashioned storytelling that seems to be effortlessly
universal in its appeal.
  Iron Giant isn't a musical either, but unlike Tarzan it doesn't bow to the
Toy Story inspired Middle-Aged-Rock-Crooner-Replaces-Show-Tunes formula. The
story takes place in the '50s, and most of the music (besides Michael Kamen's
mythic score) is period source music that usually wafts out of some distant
radio, like in the kitchen of the café where young Hogarth's mom works. We're
talking sound design more along the lines of Jaws than Beauty and the Beast. It
helps to give the film a realistic, live action feel. The atmosphere is
somewhat akin to that of Kiki's Delivery Service - a magical animated fantasy
that manages to depict reality a little more convincingly than many live action
films. 
  (It is significant to note that producer Pete Townshend recorded a rock opera
concept album based on the same Ted Hughes book the film is based on. Keeping
this in mind, it's hard to believe the filmmakers were actually able to fulfill
their vision. Call me pessimistic, but I think Disney would have forced songs
on them.)
  Tarzan, despite its fairly serious tone (I am still very fond of the scene
where Tarzan kills a leopard and hoists its corpse above his head) is saddled
by a couple of cartoony comic relief sidekicks who occasionally let their zany
antics and references interfere with the story. They're tame by Disney
standards, so they don't seem that bad in Tarzan. 
  But Iron Giant has no comic relief characters or wacky sidekicks. At the same
time, I can't think of a Disney movie that made me laugh half as hard as Iron
Giant. Instead of having characters in the story whose job it is to be funny,
the main characters themselves are funny and face funny situations. Director
Brad Bird helmed early episodes of The Simpsons and helped establish many of
the show's longstanding storytelling techniques, so perhaps it shouldn't be
surprising that the many funny scenes in Iron Giant are masterfully executed.
  It is surprising, though, or at least refreshing, how genuinely warm and
human the movie is. I think a lot of people will see that it's a non-Disney
animated feature and expect the kind of saccharine pseudo-sweetness they get
from movies like Balto or the sinister works of Don Bluth. You know, the movies
where shots of cute animals or sad orphan girls batting their eyelashes are
what passes for emotion. Hogarth is the real thing - a believable and likable
child protagonist. You can relate to him because he's smart and self-reliant
and likes to watch monster movies. 
  In his Family Dog episode of Amazing Stories, Bird displayed a knack for
depicting realistic children and getting great performances out of child voice
actors. This tradition is continued with Hogarth, who is superbly portrayed by
Eli Marienthal. In most ways, Hogarth behaves just like a normal kid, reading
comic books and playing in the lake. To me he seemed just like the kids who
were in the theater, telling each other that the giant wouldn't harm anyone
because "he's a good guy." But while Hogarth seems like a normal kid, it also
seems perfectly natural when he forms unusual friendships and performs acts of
genuine heroism. I think a lot of filmmakers, and not only those who work in
animation, could learn from the characterization in this movie.
  Hogarth's relationship with the robot begins with a situation thematically
similar to the unforgettable pitbull rescue in Babe: Pig in the City. Hogarth
encounters the huge metal creature stomping through the woods and he thinks -
maybe even correctly - that it's trying to kill him. Hogarth gets his chance to
escape when the metal monster trips into a web of power lines. Seeing it writhe
in pain, Hogarth perhaps sees that there is something human about the giant,
and he risks himself to save it from electrocution.
  This act of kindness is the beginning of a relationship in which the boy
helps the machine realize that he can be more than a weapon. The giant turns
out to be almost more of a boy than Hogarth, so much so that he idolizes
Superman. Even if Iron Giant were a shoddy piece of filmmaking, I'd probably be
suckered just by that wonderful notion: the powerful giant robot from outer
space who likes to play Superman. Lucky for me (and everyone who's not a
sucker) that's just one of many beautiful touches on this animated masterpiece,
which is easily my favorite film of the year so far. It's an instant classic
which will surely be remembered alongside the likes of the aforementioned
Kiki's Delivery Service, Toy Story and Babe - movies that make you smile just
thinking about them.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
  There are a couple of movies this summer that we've been hearing too much
about for months. I'm not talking about manufactured hype that comes from huge
advertising budgets and star studded Entertainment Tonight appearances. Rather,
I'm talking about the kind of positive word-of-mouth and word-of-word-processor
that starts with test screenings and spreads across the internet and magazine
sidebars and turns the entire cast into celebrities and it-people long before
the film's release. Before tonight, I had already seen or read about most of
the big jokes in American Pie, even the shots that were cut out. And I'd heard
about how outrageous and funny and surprisingly moral it was. 
  The hype, not surprisingly, has backfired. The movie's not bad - I certainly
enjoyed it more than most of the recent crop of teen comedies like Can't Hardly
Wait and She's All That. It's more observant, it pushes the envelope in a few
ways that a lot of former teen boys can relate to, and it has more laughs. But
most of the film's charm was wasted away in the advertising. We already saw the
hapless protagonist, played by Jason Biggs, caught watching a scrambled porn
channel with a tube sock over his penis. We know why the movie is called
American Pie and what Eugene Levy, as Biggs' father, has to say about it. And
worst of all, TV advertisements have given away a great shock value line by the
film's funniest supporting character.
  I can understand why test screening audiences might have loved the movie when
it came as a surprise, but once you strip away the surprising freshness of
these jokes, you leave a pretty standard teen sex comedy. While some of the
male characters show a fairly honest portrait of the humiliation of being a
teenage boy, many of the female characters are a ludicrous fantasy. Most
typical of the genre is a model-like "European exchange student" who at first
gives Biggs the cold shoulder, then with no explanation or motivation invites
herself over to his house to strip naked and  masturbate to his porn magazines.
There is also a hard-to-buy subplot about numerous girls trying to date a nerdy
character because he's rumored to have a large penis.
  But Natasha Lyonne and Alyson Hannigan do bring a lot of charisma to their
small roles. Lyonne, who was appealing as the star of the rather dull Slums of
Beverly Hills, doesn't really do anything besides offer sex advice to the other
characters. But Hannigan, known for playing Willow on Buffy the Vampire Slayer,
gets some of the movie's biggest laughs with her goofy portrayal of a nerdy
flutist.
  Most of the cast is good - Biggs shows particular promise as an
oft-humiliated everyman. Eddie Kaye Thomas, who plays Finch, seems doomed to
the life of the unnoticed character actor. He's believable as a dead-eyed
misfit who doesn't know how to use a public restroom. Chris Klein may be
typecast as dumb but likable jocks after this and a similar (but more
memorable) role in Election.
  Although I think it's been overwhelmed by its hype, people are definitely
still enjoying the movie. Teens and pre-teens will laugh hard at it, and if the
audience I saw it with is any indication then the younger kids will repeat all
of the punchlines out loud two or three times. These kids didn't seem to know
what was going to happen to the pie, and even if they had, the movie itself
can't really be faulted for its advertising. 
  But the aspect of the American Pie hype that is a bit silly is the claim that
it's "surprisingly sweet." It's full of sex talk and disgusting bodily function
mishaps, goes the argument, but you know what? In the end it turns out - and I
know you're not going to believe this, but I swear to god it's true - in the
end it turns out to have a heart of gold, a solid moral and message of love to
impart to the teens of America. 
  But what, honestly, did these people expect? The heroes finally get laid, and
then they light up joints, high five each other and the credits roll over an
epic kegger/wet t-shirt contest? Of course it ends with a positive message
upholding wholesome family values. Even if they do all get laid. That's how all
teen movies turn out in the end. 
Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
http://www.bucketheadland.com/visitorcenter/
"Shit, I'm the *reverse* of jiggy." --Chuck D

Title
Review for Blacula (1972)
THE CLASSICS: BLACULA and SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM
  I've always wanted to see BLACULA. In high school, I had a mild interest in
blaxploitation films, so I saw a few of the seminal works from the genre, as
well as a few obscurities like Rudy Ray Moore's AVENGING DISCO GODFATHER. I was
obsessed with funk music, so I enjoyed the soundtracks and the campy urban
swagger of the protagonists. But horror movies were more my thing, and
absurdist humor. When I heard the title BLACULA I thought it was hilarious. But
I just never got around to tracking the film down. Years later, I still
remember an episode of Whoopi Goldberg's short lived late night talk show,
where Stephen King for some reason mentioned that he too had always wanted to
see BLACULA. Whoopi said that it was a fascinating movie because Blacula was
played exquisitely by a tremendous Shakespearean actor, but she said that the
movie itself was really bad.
  Well, Whoopi was half right, as I discovered when I finally got around to
renting the movie and promptly fell in love. BLACULA is a surprisingly
effective little b-movie, with a unique cultural perspective and a sense of
humor that still works today. Like a black Vincent Price, William Marshall (who
I know primarily as the King of Cartoons on PEE WEE'S PLAYHOUSE) brings great
dignity to his performance as the title character. Unique among blaxploitation
films, BLACULA puts an afrocentric spin on the vampire myth and manages to make
a cape-wearing bloodsucker seem right at home among afro-sporting urban
hipsters.
  The film opens with a nicely crafted, Hammer style prologue between the
African prince Mamuwalde and the eurocentric Count Dracula. Mamuwalde and his
wife Lyuka (played by Vonetta McGee) have come as diplomats, imploring the
Count to stop participating in the slave trade. But the white supremacist
Dracula is insulted by the request and attacks his guests. Mamuwalde attempts
some '70s cop show style fisticuffs - the first sign that this film will not
continue in an entirely classical vein - but ends up bitten, locked in a
coffin, and cursed with the epithet "Blacula".
  Suddenly, we are thrust into stark black and white animated credits and a
predictably funky theme song. Voila - the tone has been set for a tremendously
entertaining, uniquely appealing cult masterpiece. And when the real story
begins, with the undead Mamuwalde stalking a black neighborhood in the '70s, it
never lets up. 
  Mamuwalde comes to the US via gay antique dealers who transport Count
Dracula's belongings to their gallery in New York. Soon the antique dealers are
dead and the prince is revived. Mingling with humans as Mamuwalde, he discovers
a neighborhood beauty who he believes is the reincarnation of his wife. The
story unfolds pretty much as you'd expect, with Mamuwalde trying to reunite
with his soul mate, leaving a trail of bodies that end up disappearing from
their coffins, and being tracked by cops who feel silly for believing in
vampires. What's surprising about BLACULA is the tone and the masterful
execution. I expected to laugh at this movie, not with it. But I really liked
Mamuwalde, despite his wicked deeds, and believed in the film's consistent
horror atmosphere. When I laughed, it was at the film's mercy. There are some
very funny, out of the blue jokes that keep you on your toes. 
  I enjoyed BLACULA so much that I literally ran out and rented the sequel,
SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM. The details of my sweaty two and a half mile journey to
Hollywood Video shall be chronicled in a later writing. (Okay, I made that up,
I didn't really run. But I did go back and rent the sequel before even
returning the original.) 
  I knew that this followup wasn't supposed to be as good as its predecessor,
but I was clamoring for some more of that Mamuwalde magic, and I figured having
Pam Grier in it was a good sign. To my delight, the sequel is every bit as good
a film as the original. I have a feeling that critics at the time enjoyed
BLACULA, but had grown tired of that style of filmmaking by the time the sequel
was released. Therefore, they remembered their enjoyment of the original and
assumed the sequel just wasn't as good.
  Seeing them for the first time side by side, though, they're of one piece.
The sequel shares the strong atmosphere and the unexpected humor of the
original. It throws in a new setting, among an American voodoo cult, and an
added dimension of tragedy to Mamuwalde. 
  The afrocentric themes are better developed this time around. Mamuwalde
admires African-Americans who are interested in their heritage, and shares his
knowledge with them. He dislikes ignorant young people who waste away their
days partying, so he often chooses these people to transform into his vampire
minions. In one memorable scene, Mamuwalde is enraged by two pimps who try to
mug him. Before beating them to death, he lectures them from the point of view
of an African prince who fought against slavery. He angrily accuses them of
enslaving their sisters and imitating their slavemasters. William Marshall
completely sells these lines, bringing to them an overwhelming righteousness.
You want to apologize to him, even if you're not a pimp.
  Like the first film, SCREAM BLACULA SCREAM has a charismatic black cop who
leads the investigation of Mamuwalde's killing spree. And again, there is a
skeptical white cop who almost impedes the investigation. The two have a great
chemistry here, teasing each other, making you understand their friendship even
though the white guy's not the one you're rooting for.
  Things get really good when Mamuwalde enlists the voodoo priestess played by
Pam Grier to reverse Dracula's curse. He is fiercely protective of Grier,
because he knows she's the only one with the ability to stop the madness and
return him to his old self. When the monumental voodoo ritual is interrupted
before completion, Mamuwalde goes over the edge. He wastes his last chance for
redemption on an insane rampage where he, for the first time in the series,
identifies himself as "Blacula."
  Marshall seems to have contributed a lot more to the BLACULA films than his
great performances. In the book _What It Is What It Was_ (a beautiful
collection of poster art from black films of the '70s) he reveals that in the
original script, Mamuwalde was named "Andrew Brown", the same name as Andy in
Amos 'n Andy. Marshall says that he wanted to remove the story "from the
stereotype of ignorant, conniving stupidity that evolved in the United States
to justify slavery." Instead, he suggested the "African hero who had never been
subjected to slavery" who ultimately became the subject of the film. 
  It is largely this challenging of stereotypes and respect for African
heritage that makes the series so unique. Other blaxploitation films have
presented strong, African-American heroes and heroines, but few have
incorporated cultural issues so successfully into pulpy b-movie theatrics.
These are movies that make you regret that you can't go out and rent more like
them.
Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
http://www.bucketheadland.com/visitorcenter/
"Shit, I'm the *reverse* of jiggy." --Chuck D
