Authors
Fernando Vallejo
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Sunday (1997)
 Starring David Suchet, Lisa Harrow, Jared Harris, Larry Pine, Joe Grifasi,
Arnold Barkus and  Jimmy Broadway. Directed by Jonathan Nossiter. Running
Time: 93 minutes. Rated R
 _______________________________________________________________
  A man briskly meanders alongside a Queens railroad station. His appearence
leaves something to be desired: bald, overweight and despite his various
items of clothing to protect from the chilly winter cold, he elicits gestures
that indicate heat loss in some part of his ample body. Without warning, a
woman, in her early fifties- late fourties approaches him. " Are you Matthew
De La Corta " she rabidly asks with a punctuated British accent. " We met at
a party in London " she adds. The woman, Madeleine, assumes the man she's
formulating the question to is the famous English director she deeply
admires. 
  " Yes " replies the man after a heavy pause. " I'm Matthew ". But as we've
witnessed, a prolific film director residing in a homeless shelter, in a
seedy part of the Big Apple is an impossible circumstance. Oliver, his actual
name, plays along with the woman's erroneous presumption, and embarks on a
journey, an odyssey of love, despreation, jealousy, pain and the other pathos
of life, subsequently commencing the gripping "Sunday", winner of the 1997
Sundance film festival, and rightfully so. For here we have one of the most
ardently passionate, visually absorbing and dramatically intriguing films of
the deacde. Director Jonathan Nossiter's creation will likely conclude the
year as 1997's best film.
 As the story intensely marched on, I found myself glued to my seat.
Experiencing "Sunday" produces the same enigmatic jolt similar to reading a
novel by Dostoyevsky, albeit the structure is different, one gets the
pleasurable satisfaction of seeing characters emotionally stripped down right
before our eyes, symbolizing class, structure and frame of mind but also
revealing their most intimate secrets and feelings. I was exhilarated,
permeated into the lives of these two people, a man whose labor injustices (
he was unexpectedly fired form IBM ) have led him to unfold a side of his
nature that has been greatly swayed by the poor environment he inhabits; a
calm, callous gentleman who has discovered a new way of life, previously
unfathomable to him -- and learned how to cope with it. His migration from an
economically stable man to a quietly desolate, home-less living has left him
no alternative but to live life day-by-day, abiding an unwanted existence one
fears of enduring. 
 Madeleine, an amiable, yet dissatisfied aspiring actress who's been
consistently undermined by his buffoonish and oppresive, whose own life
hasn't been exatly the most ideal of them all. From her eyes, we see this
excursion into the desired and the unknown as an escape from reguliarity, a
testament to liberation, a ballad to unadulterated detachment.
 As written by James Lasdun and Jonathan Nossiter, "Sunday" has the ability
to be multi-layered without clogging our senses, whimsical yet not
sentimentalizing and mystifying but not alienating us from the protagonists.
Nossiter's crisp, cool and compelling direction is the sort of work that won
"Shine's" Scott Hicks his first Oscar Nomination. And if that happening
doesn't occur to Nossiter ( and the film ), I will dismiss the March event.
Here is a film shot in an equally meager budget as "Chasing Amy" and "In The
Company of Men", surpassing them both in the optical and scriptwriting
departments. 
    The two leads are nothing short of superb. Suchet, last seen in the
big-budget techno-thriller  "Executive Decision", conveys the sense of loss
from an everyday man with extreme restraint. He doesn't indulge in sorrow,
but he prudently indicates us to symphatize with him as we contemplate his
dead-end and how he functions around it. And it appears Oliver is prone to
live his life as a journeyman, one day at a time, omitting the anguish that
naturally arises. Madeleine, played magnificently by Lisa Harrow, fleshes out
hewr character in an extremely convincing fashion. Madeleine is in better
shape than Oliver, but surprisingly much more desperate and eager about her
fate, representing that, at one juncture, money becomes irrelevant as to who
you are. Harrow allows us to penetrate into her torture wonderfully.
 But "Sunday's" perceptiveness extends to much more than that. We are
immersed into the lives of Oliver's homeless fellows, how the Big Apple
perceives them and we are there to understand what they live through. In one
wonderful scene, we observe a scrawny fella ( who also convives eith Oliver
in the shleter ), with a deep penetrating glare he stares at the legs of a
woman he cannot see. Nossiter focuses the camera solely on her thighs, giving
birth to what this man's sense of lust, the absence of her face acknowledges
how vagrant folks have been fogotten by standard *society*.
 As the credits of "Sunday" rolled, I remained calm in my seat, recollecting
 the situations and glares of the characters, admiring the power, the
impeccable narrative and remembering the visually arresting ( New York's
texture has rarely been captured so well ) sites Nossiter surrenders.
"Sunday" is a true illustration of authentic movie magic.

Title
Review for Sick: The Life & Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist (1997)
 Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist
 Starring Bob Flanagan and Sheree Rose. Interviews by Kathe Burkhart, Kirby
Dick and Rita Valencia. Produced and directed by Kirby Dick. Running Time: 90
mins. This film is not rated.
 __________________________________________________________
  The central themes of "Sick: The Life and Death of Bob Flanagan,
Supermasochist" are pain and love, and its subsequent effect on a person's
life. Its protagonist, Bob Flanagan, who died at the age of 52, suffered from
cystic fibrosis, a mortal disease which debilitates the lungs by saturating
them with thick coats of mucus, preventing him from normal breathing. 
 The movie is about much more than recouperating ( or attempting to ) from
this disease. 
 An audacious, fabulously triumphant docudrama, "Sick" chronicles the life of
Flanagan and his vicious, unthinkable acts of sadomasochism conducted with his
mistress of 15 years, Sheree Rose, who amazingly provided much of the footage
for the film. 
 Flanagan's idelogy crosses the realms of rebelliousness and becomes
transcendental, similar to Terry Zwigoff's brilliant 1994 "Crumb", which also
explored the dysfunction of an artist by painting not a sympathetic portrait,
but a realistic one. Both Crumb and Flanagan revelled in their defects. But
Flanagan was not only a man content on enduring the pain via lungs, he
inflicted acts of pain on himself at a very young age, courageously defying
God ( he was an Irish Catholic )
and turning his body into a work of art, which he unraveled in museums and
lectures.
 Behold these works of physical art. Among them is a metal ball inserted
inside his anus, and, --the most disturbing scene of the decade--, nailing his
penis to a board. 
 Flanagan was a man of great intelligence, wit and humor, as well as adopting
a sense of candidness scarcely seen in modern filmmaking. Not only did he
approach his disease with humor, peforming burlesque acts in front of an
audience, he was also revitalized by his approachment. Most with cystic
fibrosis do not make it past their earlier  twenties ( there's also a subplot
involving a female devotee who knew death was awaiting her. )
 But the most outstanding thing about "Sick" is Flanagan's relationship with
Sheree. Brimming with honesty, sensual stimulation and unapologetically sad
moments of pain, their powerful bond lifts "Sick" into a rare cinematic high,
where we forget we are in an auditorium and become a part of these people.
 The last scene, where we see the hero murmuring the last words to his wife in
a hospital bed, as he struggles for his last moments of life, is raw, tender,
hideous. It goes a step beyond cinematic intimacy.

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
    Starring James Spader, Holly Hunter, Elias Koteas, Deborah Kara-Unger,
Rosanna Arquette. Produced, written and directed by David Cronenberg. Running
Time: 110 mins. Rated NC-17.
 ______________________________________________________
   Few movies transcend high expectations and cross the line between a movie
and
an experience. In 1996, "Breaking the Waves" and "Fargo" rose above any other
features and became experiences. David Cronenberg's "Crash" outstrips any
genre formality and ascends into an unforgettable decaying of urban
civilization that only dreams or nightmares can match its jolts. You may or
may not like it, but it is a complete vision.
    "Crash" has a poetic, nihilistic rythm in its car wrecks and crashes and
it automatically transforms into the rudimentary theme that technology is more
and more dictating on the fate of our lives and the destiny of mankind. The
sadomasochistic pleasure generated by the characters' obsessions with ruptured
metal is the disguise used by Cronenberg this time, who really accomplishes
his most important work to date.
     Based on J.G Ballard's 1973 novel,  "Crash"  tells the incommode life of
director James Ballard ( James Spader ) after a horrible car crash, which
kills th husband of Dr. Helen Remington ( Holly Hunter ). The two wind up in
the same hospital and puzzingly become erotically charged by an unexplainable
attraction that's linking them: the car crash. Soon, they have sex in cars,
are turned on by crash dummies footage and their sexual force is so colossal
they plant their on car wrecks. Joining them in this almost surreal journey is
Cronenberg's most memorable character to date, Vaughan ( Elias Koteas ) who
worships all sorts of bloody crashes and the re-shaping of the human body
through wounds and scars. He even keeps a portfolio with gruesome pictures of
devastated people right after accidents. Gradually, Ballard and his wife
Catherine ( Deborah Kara Unger )  become involved in this disproportionate
world of pleasure, domination and survival. 
    Cronenberg's past work consisted of artsy-fartsy duds which were coated by
hisscience-fictional, unexquisite grotesqueries , but in "Crash" Cronenberg
concocts a revolutionary modification of the concept man vs technology, in a
deadly collision course that demonstrates the evolution of an artist when
presented with a pragmatic theory about the future. He has cleverly fumigated
these characters from social exposition and confronting our senses with a
group of people and not an entire society, because in a morbid manner, they
are representing th aberration of our world which will not be the same, no
matter what. The honesty of the protagonists is not a facade of vague
personification but a crude reality of how to understand the future ahead of
us, beacuse in "Crash" even at the most explicit, shifting sex traingles there
is no major conflict the characters are face with. The conflict is humans
approaching a new era.
    It can also be said  "Crash" contains human beings devoid of background,
personalities or opinions but just like Kubrick's "2001" and Ridley Scott's
"Blade Runner,"  "Crash" symbolizes a mechanical community in a fight with
themselves , their own progressing minds which in essence, are auto-
destructing us. Machines take over man.
     The sex is unlike any other we have recently seen, conducted mostly in
cars, dangerously erotic and brilliantly executed, devoid of any feelings, and
there is no moment in "Crash" where the sex is juxtapositioned away from the
unexplained phenomenon of getting turned on by metal.  When James and Helen
forst glance at each other after the deadly accident, it marks the beginning
of a civilized, urban post apocalyptic phantasmagoria vitalized by  adrenaline
rushing moments.  
   The people are brave to face their wicked temptations which at first, seem
unexplicable, and when Vaughan is introduced their pleasure is given another
cryptic element :can technology change the shape of humans ? can technology
abolish the evolution of men ?. Vaughan is a man with ideas and they are all
experiencing this vacuum of studies and  questions with a desire to sexually
benefit from these arguments as well as exploring new scientific grounds.
    Disguising a universal theme with crude sex is not only appropiate, it is
necessary. "Crash" unabashedly emphasizes that relationships, love and
cherishing for other human beings are missing in today's microchip age, and
again drawing a comparison to "Blade Runner" its proclaiming a bleak, lifeless
unfolding world ahead of us. "Crash" is set in the present, it doesn't rely on
astonishing sets, art direction or extravagant effects, its heart lies on the
thematic components, the direction, the coldness and the coldness of the
actors.
     The ensemble cast is excellent , Spader, whose expresionless face is
letter-perfect for the character and adds to the gloomy tone , but Elias
Koteas is deliciously malignant as the morbid Vaughan . You may remeber him
from " Exotica " , but his prescence here adds an eccentric effect, as if this
sick man is really onto something.
     J. G Ballard wrote "Crash"  in the early 70's , but twenty four years
later it is the quintissential " controversy " movie. Division towards the
film will certainly have very wide divisions: either one is captivated or is
tremendously aggravated. Ted Turner, President of Fine Line Pictures has
criticised "Crash" for being preposterous, as well as some top critics. The
combo of flesh and metal may have gotten to them, but with sumptous orgasm-
fests it was deservedly rewarded an NC-17 rating. I suppose these people were
turned off by the constant sadomasochism.
     Time is the only response as to wether "Crash" will rank among "
Metropolis", "Runner" and "A Clockwork Orange" in their dedication to express
the deterioration of mankind. It relentelssly out-smarts a ridiculous road it
could have taken, and by amplifying a fragment of a concept, the destruction
that lies ahead of us. Thanks to J.G Ballard , David Cronenberg has finally
given us a dazzling piece of filmmaking to discuss and share our opinions.

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
 A Miramax Pictures release. Starring Robin Williams, Matt Damon, Ben Affleck,
Stellan Skarsgard, Minnie Driver, Casey Affleck, Cole Hauser, George Plimpton.
Script by Ben Affleck and Matt Damon. Produced by Lawrence Bender. Directed by
Gus Van Sant. Running Time: 125 mins. Rated R.
"Good Will Hunting" is two movies in one: an independent take on the struggle
of four Boston pals and a traditional Hollywood, "prodigy child" film complete
with upbeats, downfalls, sporadically moving situations and plenty, plenty of
shtick.
 Unusually directed by Gus Van Sant, "Good Will Hunting"  overcomes the
banalities of its story by affirming the emergence of fresh, new talent. The
film stars Matt Damon as Will Hunting as a mathematical, rebellious whiz kid
inadvertly discovered by a college professor ( Stellan Skarsgard ), who places
him under psychological supervision with Robin Williams. In a nutshell, that's
it.
The core of the "Good Will Hunting" is Damon, who infuses the script ( co-
written by "Chasing Amy's" Ben Affleck ) with just the right amount of warmth,
sensitivity and humanity to accentuate his position as a refreshing multi-
talented performer. But it's the acting that hits the mark, and Damon hits all
the right notes, flying over Robin Williams' deja-vu role ("Awakenings" was
written all over this ) as a devastated shrink who has closed all contact with
society due to his wife's tragic death. Damon effortlessly blends the
carelesness of a gregarious, confused thug with the absorbing ingeniousness of
someone like Einstein. His rich, complex character is the pulp of "Good Will
Hunting." Everything else pales in comparison.
 "Good Will Hunting" exposes the lack of profoundness of deliberately
schmaltzy storytelling, but, unlike "Little Man Tate" or "Phenomenon", it
doesn't set up its story in a black and white, point A to point B be manner,
but as the saga of an extraordinary individual whose feasibility for success
doesn't automatically signify he must make easy, familiar choices, like the
protagonists in the aforementioned. 
