Authors
Oscar van Vliet
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Widows' Peak (1994)
     I saw this film a week ago in a sneak preview in Utrecht's Camera
theater.  It stars Mia Farrow, and some other people I had never heard
of.  The film is located in the Irish village of Kilshannon.  The
village is more or less divided into two parts: The lower part, where
the common people live, and the hill, called Widows' Peak, where the
film is set, and where the widow's of Kilshannon live.  This has been
arranged long ago, to keep men off the hill, and only widows can buy a
house on the hill.
     The film handles the arrival of a new resident, a young British
widow whose husband died in the war (it is set shortly after WW1 if I
recall).  For some reason one of the Ladies has a violent dislike for
her, which evolves throughout the movie into a war without quarter and
eventually leads to the downfall of the village.
     Though you won't notice it in the beginning, the film is done so
that you can guess the outcome a quarter of an hour away.  Also, the
fights between the two ladies are by far not subtle enough.  I suppose
the writer wrote how two men would handle it, and "femalized" the
fight, but it just doesn't work.  The acting could be better, and the
pace is too slow to keep your attention focused, but at least the
setting is done right.
     All in all, I gave it 4 out of 10, and a definite warning not to
see it if you're not into this kind of movie.  As I left the cinema,
the comments I heard around me would indicate that they'd better not
show this one at all.
