Authors
Mike Church
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Twenty Bucks (1993)
     TWENTY BUCKS follows a twenty-dollar bill in its passage from a
cash machine, through the hands of a startlingly variety of people, to
its penultimate fate of being torn into tiny pieces.  Along the way it
gets stolen about four times, lost a couple, pushed into a stripper's G
string, inherited, swallowed by a fish, mailed, driven over, and so
on.
     There's lots of good acting, notably by Linda Hunt who plays a bag
lady.  Like many of the characters, she keeps popping up in one
scene after another.  The result is a series of sub-plots that are
woven together by their shared characters and by the double sawbuck.
     An interesting side note: the script was written decades ago, and
has been rejected by various studios many times over the years.  As it
appears here, the script has been re-written by the original author's
daughter -- there's a scene in the movie which will probably remind you
of this fact.
     The acting, directing and so on all seemed great to my novice
eye.  It has a great sense of humour, and of the cruelty of fate.  I'd
recommend this movie to any of you who find yourself in a video store
with intent to kill an evening.

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
     The story: The film is a loosely biographical look at the life of
Ed Wood (duh), the maker of truly terrible films such as PLAN 9 FROM
OUTER SPACE and GLEN OR GLENDA.  Wood is shown to be a person desperate
to live up to the image of his idol, Orson Wells, who wrote, directed,
and starred in CITIZEN KANE in his late 20's.  Unfortunately, Wood
appears to have several handicaps as a filmmaker: he has very little
talent, no connections within the movie industry, and no money.  In his
favour he has enormous enthusiasm, massive confidence, support from
friends (such as Bela Lugosi, the legendary ex-Dracula, fantastically
portrayed here by Martin Landau) and his girlfriend.  He's also a great
bullshitter.
     The films he makes are hampered by his scripts, the actors he
hires, the meddling of his financial backers (in some cases, he gets
money for the movie in exchange for letting the donor play a key role),
and lack of quality control: scene after scene is showed being shot
with disastrous flaws, and in each case Wood calls "Cut!  Perfect,
print it," never once calling for a second take.  The result is a batch
of truly awful Ed Wood films.
     Johnny Depp strikes me as the kind of actor that some people love
and others hate.  Having seen him in BENNY & JOON and WHAT'S EATING
GILBERT GRAPE, I like him a lot.  His work in title role of ED WOOD is
great: he does a terrific job of playing this hack moviemaker with
compassion and style.  He does not play "Johnny Depp;" in other words,
he plays each of his roles very differently.  He gives Ed Wood energy,
charisma, warmth, and vulnerability, but doesn't prevent you from
believing that his character is fundamentally handicapped as a
filmmaker.  Martin Landau does an unbelievable job of playing Bela
Lugosi, now well past the end of his career and a junkie.  Despite the
major roles played by these two actors, there is no sense of one trying
to upstage the other; rather, they reinforce each other--perhaps at
the expense of the other actors, none of whom made any great impression
on me.  Even Bill Murray, who I normally find very charismatic, seems
firmly in the back seat in this movie.
     Still, the movie kinda bummed me out.  I got the same feeling from
BATMAN, another film directed by Tim Burton, so maybe it's his fault.
Despite having some laughs written into it, the movie wasn't very much
fun.  Wood obviously had a shitty life, desperately trying to re-live
Orson Wells' life, and the point of the movie seemed to be to jeer at
Ed Wood for not being able to fulfill his dream.  He bounced perkily
through his life making one crappy movie after another, always a day
late and a dollar short (Tom Waits) and clearly going nowhere.  As if
showing Wood to be a blinkered, talentless (but likeable) geek weren't
enough, Burton spends way too much time and footage on his subject's
closet transvestitism, which starts out funny and ends up looking like
a long series of cheap shots.
     But: the movie oozes style, from the fantastic opening titles (a
parody of all the B movie openings you've ever seen) through the
all-black&white production, with its wonderful camera work (alternating
classic B movie "what-is-he-thinking" ultra-closeup face shots with
fantastic helicopter pans blending seamlessly into flawless miniature
sets) to the "where are they now" closing credits.  Speaking of the
latter, again it was pretty depressing to find out what happened to
some of these actors--very little good news here.
     Rating: if you liked BATMAN, don't mind admitting that you had fun
watching B movies before you got old and sophisticated, and are on the
right side of the like/hate Johnny Depp fence, you'd happily give this
movie $7.50 on the unattainable $8.00 scale.  If you wouldn't be caught
dead eating popcorn in the same room as Godzilla and a miniature
disintegrating Tokyo, or if you found BATMAN irredeemably gloomy, you
probably won't find much to like here either--say $2.50's worth.  I'd
give it a solid $4.00, with a $.50 bonus for having no gunfire, car
chases, or helicopter battles, which means that I once again got my
money's worth from the Ridge.
