Authors
J. Boyajian
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)
     About 20 minutes into LETHAL WEAPON 3, my nephew turned to me and
asked, "Does this movie have a plot?"  And that question represents
everything that is wrong with LW3.  Quite frankly, the movie is a mess
on a number of levels.  A *funny* mess, to be sure, but still a mess.
As the Bard of Avon would put it, it was full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing.  It was just about everything a bad sequel usually
is.
    o Joe Pesci's appearance in the film smacked of dollarsigns.  Not
      just because he's "hot" at the moment, but because it seemed to
      exploit his contribution to LW2.  His character and performance
      in LW2 was what made the film -- his presence as "the Third
      Stooge" made it distinctive enough from the original.  To put
      him in the third film seemed to be nothing but repetition of a
      successful ingredient in place of doing something else more
      innovative.  Storywise, there was absolutely no reason for him
      to be in the film.
    o The character of Murtaugh seemed to be relegated to second class
      status.  The high point of the WEAPON films has been the utterly
      charming, and disarming, chemistry between Gibson and Glover.  The
      reason to see the films is to see *them* bounce off each other.
      Here, the Gibson/Glover team was largely pushed aside in favor of
      the Gibson/Russo team.
    o Even worse, this last bit *looked* like a last-minute rethink.
    o The Gibson/Glover chemistry was still there, and if anything, it
      felt even stronger than in the previous two films, almost as if
      they realized that with the downplay of their partnership, each
      moment their shared was more precious and they packed as much as
      they could into them.
    o I liked Russo's character.  Intelligent, attractive, competent,
      and a complete match for Riggs.  Their love-making scene was
      delightful, going from comparing bullet wounds and other scars,
      to passionately kissing on the floor.  The cut-away before any
      explicit was something of a pleasant change from the norm, as
      was the fact that this time, it was the *guy* who stripped to
      his underwear while the woman stayed fully clothed.
    o While Murtaugh was being pushed aside as Riggs' partner, they did
      a lot of nice solo stuff with him.  Kudos go to Glover for his
      sensitive performance of a man wracked with guilt over shooting a
      kid, despite it being completely justified.  The later scenes with
      Roger's son were also very touching, as were the scenes at the
      funeral with the dead kid's parents.
All in all, I have to say that I enjoyed seeing the film, but my heart
just isn't in it to recommend it.  It doesn't even come close to either
of the first two films in the series.  In the last three or so months, I
had occasion to see LW1 on video/cable.  As soon as the film was over
each time, I felt the urge to immediately spin up my laserdisc of LW2
and watch that all the way through (and I did).  I don't know if I'll
buy LW3 when it comes out on disc, but if I do, I doubt very much if
I'll watch as much as I'll watch the first two.
--- jayembee (Jerry Boyajian, DEC, "The Mill", Maynard, MA)
    boyajian@ruby.enet.dec.com

Title
Review for Da hong deng long gao gao gua (1991)
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is the latest film by the hot, young Chinese
director Zhang Yimou (RED SORGHUM, JU DOU).  It was nominated this year
for the Best Foreign Film Oscar, and like JU DOU, it's been banned in
its home country for being ideologically incorrect.  Quite frankly, I
was never able to figure out what it was about JU DOU that got the
Chinese government so worked up, but with this film it's a bit more
obvious.
     Gong Li (star of Yimou's previous films) plays Songlian, a young
woman in 1920s China who becomes the fourth wife/mistress of a rich man.
Each of the four women occupy their own wing of the Master's mansion,
with their own maids.  Whichever one the Master chooses to sleep with on
a given night has red lanterns lit and placed around her quarters and
gets to be at the top of the pecking order for as long as the Master
sleeps with her.  Not surprisingly, the four women struggle against each
other to be the apple of the Master's eye, and it's these power politics
that form the core of the story.
     On a higher level, though, Yimou's film is and allegory about the
Chinese political and social system.  Like that system, the Master's
house is run with a rigid structure of rules and customs that must be
obeyed at the risk of losing status (at best) or life (at worst).  The
Master himself is painted in rather vague terms: we never see him very
well, he's either in medium or distant shots and/or is turned partly
away from the camera, and his presence is felt more than shown.  The
most pointed aspect of the Master-as-government allegory is when one of
the wives is killed for adultery and another one accuses the household
servants of being murderers after she follows them and finds the body of
the murdered wife.  To her accusations, the Master says, "You saw
nothing," much like the way Beijing denies the Tiannamen massacre.
     Visually, the film is beautiful.  Yimou's composition is exquisite,
and moves the film at a very deliberate pace, so that it seems almost as
if each the film is intended to be a series of paintings.  I was
particularly taken with one sequence where Songlian meets the Young
Master (the son of the First Mistress) after following the sounds of his
flute-playing.  There is also a nice series of overlapping dissolves
just before the closing credits that is simple yet wonderfully done.
     (It should be noted that those with a feminist bent might find this
film hard to sit through.  Not because the film itself is sexist, but it
portrays a highly patriarchal and sexist society, and so the dialogue is
filled with various remarks about women's role in society as servants to
the man.)
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is a major film from a man who is rapidly
becoming a major figure in world cinema.  I couldn't recommend it more
highly.
