Authors
Travis Cottreau
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Deceiver (1997)
    Tim Roth plays a possible suspect (and the only lead) in a murder
case where the victim was killed, and the two pieces of her body were
found miles apart. Needless to say, there is lots of political pressure
to solve this crime and the two policemen (played by Michael Rooker and
Chris Penn) don't really have much to go on. Almost the entire movie is
set in the police interrogation room.
    Shades of "The Usual Suspects", "Deceiver" is full of quick plot
twists and lots of head games that leaves the audience guessing all the
way through. The movie, however, fails to play by the rules and leaves
the viewer with lots of questions and no answers. I have to admit, up
until the final seconds of the movie, I was convinced that it was going
to be really good, then the credits roll and I had to say, "HUH! What
the #$%! was that!"
    If you're going to make a "shell game" type movie, it would be
helpful if, at the end of the movie, you'd lift up all the shells and
show us where the ball is. As it is, all the shells were swept off the
table and the movie maker expects members of the audience to sit back
and say, "Ahhhh.... Ohhhhh.... THAT'S WHAT THEY WERE UP TO!", but no,
there's no bolt of lightning, no revealing sequence, you're forced to
guess at the end. Who's telling the truth? Who's lying? What was the
point? There are so many little, meaningless clues along the way, that I
have the distinct impression that the writer out-clevered himself and
just didn't know what to put into the final scene.
    If someone can e-mail me and explain what the hell the final
sequence was supposed to mean, I would be eternally grateful.
