Authors
leeper@mtgbcs.usae.avaya.com
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Pearl Harbor (2001)
     Months ago the trailer for PEARL HARBOR intrigued me.  Then I
got a rude shock at the end that it was produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer and directed by Michael Bay.  Bruckheimer is the king of
sound and fury action film blockbusters.  Michael Bay was his
director on THE ROCK and ARMAGEDDON.  PEARL HARBOR got some really
negative critical response prior to its release.  This may have
lowered my expectations, but I really do not see what the fuss was
about.  I would probably call PEARL HARBOR a flawed film, but not a
bad one.  Its historical accuracy is better than many films set in
the past but still worse than some.  PEARL HARBOR suffers a great
deal from comparison to TORA! TORA!  TORA!, one of the finest and
most accurate films about World War II and the classic account of
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.  The plot is a somewhat mythic
story (some might call it "cliched") of two close friends who fall
out when they innocently both come to love the same woman.  Then
they have their relationship patched up when they face a cause more
important than their differences.
     PEARL HARBOR is the story of two men, friends since their
boyhood in Tennessee.  Rafe McCawley (played by Ben Affleck) and
Danny Walker (Josh Hartnett) have a friendship based on each's love
of airplanes and flight.  They join the Army Air Corps together and
during the physical Rafe falls for an attractive nurse, Evelyn
Johnson (Kate Beckinsale).  Evelyn quickly becomes the second love
in Rafe's life; flying remains the first.  Even as he woos her,
giving her origami birds, flying is never far from his mind.
(Origami is ironically a Japanese art.)  When Rafe gets an
opportunity to fly with the RAF he takes it leaving Danny and Evelyn
behind.  Then he is shot down and thought to be dead the predictable
love triangle is set in motion.
     The casting of PEARL HARBOR, like most aspect of the film is
flawed.  Affleck is hardly the most charismatic lead, but here he
flies rings around the low-key Hartnett.  Beckinsale is a good
actor, probably most familiar for her role in COLD COMFORT FARM.
John Voight's face is just enough wrong for FDR to be irksome, like
a musical note played just slightly off-key.  Mako, of the Conan
movies, somehow plays a very different type of officer from how we
are used to seeing Yamamoto from films like TORA! TORA! TORA! and
MIDWAY.  Alec Baldwin plays a somewhat idealized Doolittle while Dan
Aykroyd, looking a little fat, is a navy intelligence officer.
     It is, perhaps, unfair to compare TORA! TORA! TORA! too closely
with PEARL HARBOR.  The former is an attempt at a very accurate
representation; the latter is a polished and soft focus love story
told against a backdrop of America's entry into the war.  It might
be more accurate to compare it to HANOVER STREET, even with the big
spectacular set piece of the half-hour of film devoted to an attack
that was only about an hour long in real life.  Bay uses time to
show the viewer a lot of different scenes of the destruction and how
the Americans fought back.
     PEARL HARBOR is a film that has an extremely nice look.  The
cinematography seems far better than the writing.  It is one of
those films in which you could take a frame from one of any number
of the scenes and use it for a poster for the film.  The frame
composition is often beautiful and occasionally even a little too
perfect and overly dramatic.  Early in the film Bay captures a very
nice 1941 feel and then drenches the scenes in a rich blue to top
off the image.  The viewer can frequently tell the CGI from reality,
but when it is following a bomb from the moment it is dropped down
into a compartment in a battleship, at least it is an imaginative
use.  At another point two sailors on a scaffold on the side of a
battleship see a torpedo approaching below them and hitting their
boat.  In another interesting usage of the visual effects a nurse is
slowly overcome by the horror of the casualties she is seeing she
enters a state of shock.  The camera shows this by leaving her in
focus and selectively loses focus on her surroundings.  These are
scenes that could never have been shown even in a TORA! TORA! TORA!.
     The style of PEARL HARBOR is spotty.  While the film shows half
an hour of unremitting violence, it is fairly reserved in its
showing of blood and there is no visible dismemberment, unlike
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.  Only the hospital scenes show serious carnage.
The dogfight scenes seem a little too much like a video game.  And
the rock song over the end credits was horribly out of place and
will be an embarrassment when this film is seen again in years to
come.
     Pearl Harbor is over three hours long, but is always worth
watching, if not worth listening to.  The film had undeniable
problems, but it was released needing only a fine tuning not the
overhaul must critics are implying is called for.  I rate it a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
