Authors
Tim Larison
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Running on Empty (1988)
     RUNNING ON EMPTY is one of the best films released this year, an excellent
family drama with strong performances by Judd Hirsh, Christine Lahti, and River
Phoenix.
     The story involves a family on the run from the law.  In the early 1970s
Art and Annie Pope (Judd Hirsch and Christine Lahti) blew up a napalm
laboratory as part of the anti-war movement.  The explosion inadvertently
blinded and paralyzed a janitor.  The FBI has been on their tracks for years,
as the  Popes frequently have to move from town to town changing their
identities wherever they go.
     The movie is not so much a chase story with the Popes running from the
law, but rather deals with the Popes' fugitive life style and the effect it has
on their two sons.  Danny Pope (River Phoenix) is a 17-year-old coming into
manhood feeling a conflict between his own desires and the protection and
safety of his parents.  Danny is a talented musician who is "discovered" by a
local high school teacher, and also falls in love with the teacher's daughter.
As Danny's musical reputation as a  young prodigy spreads through the town, a
conflict develops because of the desire of his parents to maintain their
anonymity without stunting Danny's growth.  
     The film deals with the age-old struggle of becoming your own person in
conflict with what your family would like you to be.  The actors are very 
believable in their roles, and the film has an emotional intensity that caused 
quite a few tears in the audience I was in.  
     The movie also touches on the values of the 60's generation in conflict
with the traditional views of that time, and how the 60's generation have to
deal with similar conflicts with the children of their own.  One powerful scene
where Annie Pope meets her father after 15 years of absence is worth the price
of admission to the film.
     The story starts off slow and takes some time to get going, but if you
stick with it, RUNNING ON EMPTY will really capture your attention.  I would
give it a +3 on a -4 to +4 scale.

Title
Review for Innerspace (1987)
     INNER SPACE, the latest release produced by Steven Spielberg, is a fun
two-hour romp with the same flair that made BACK TO THE FUTURE such a hit.  The
story involves a top-secret military project to inject a miniaturized pilot and
his high-tech submarine into the blood stream of a rabbit.  Unfortunately, the
bad guys find out about the project, and raid the laboratory just before the
experiment is to take place.  A scientist flees with the miniaturized sub in a
syringe, and injects it into a unsuspecting nerdy pedestrian in a nearby
shopping mall.  Soon  the nerd hears a little voice in his ear telling him what
is going on; he is horrified to learn that he must retrieve a stolen computer
chip from the bad guys in order to get the sub inside of him removed and
reenlarged back to normal size.
     As with his other films, Spielburg borrows concepts from films in the past
and combines them to make an entertaining movie.  The innocent bystander
suddenly involved in political intrigue is pure Hitchcock, the shots of the
tiny sub in the body are reminiscent of FANTASTIC VOYAGE, the high-tech sub and
the situations it gets the nerd into remind me of BACK TO THE FUTURE, and the
mad-cap chase scenes are similar to ROMANCING THE STONE.  The mood is
definitely light and there are numerous well-done sight gags (though at times
the humor gets a little silly).
     If you want a good laugh, and can refrain from thinking too hard, go see
INNER SPACE.  The sneak preview audience I was in thoroughly enjoyed it.
