Authors
S. Freund
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Spice World (1997)
Spiceworld -- Despite the spicy title, it's a rather vanilla movie, all
things considered.  If you're not a fan of the Girls, let me save you an
hour and a half of saffron: don't waste your thyme on this one.  However,
if you don't hate them, or (like me) you think they're just plain savory,
some sage advice is to cumin get it while it's still hot... due to chili
reviews by cloves-minded critics, I cayenne see this bay-sically
good-hearted flick tarragon from theaters before too long, parsley because
the anti-Spice movement is inexplicably strong these days.  The plot (what
little there is), doesn't have too many leeks in it, and follows the girls
through a series of capers they experience on the way to their first live
show (which will turn out to be a lemon if the villain and his kelpers get
their way).  Peppered with silliness and grrl power, I was really arrow
rooting for Our Heroes by the end of the movie.  In particularly odd
moments, Roger Moore shows his salt and earns his celery in an odd turn
that most closely resembles a particular James Bond villain, anise no
surprise when he shows up feeding a pig with a baby bottle.  Throwing
caraway, the Girls' on-screen manager is so hilariously bitter and uptight
that one would expect him to bleed vinegar.  Dill, despite some
shortcomings (none of the humor was laugh-out-loud funny), it's clear the
girls fenneled all they could (and they mint what they said) into their
project, and while it mace seem strange to some, I found their enthusiasm
suited me to a tea.  Soy sue me, I liked it.
Overall, though I'm destined not to curry favor from others for this
review, I'd gingerly recommend this movie, if for no other reason than
it's allspice, and kept a goofy smile on my face the whole time.  Cassia
later.
