Authors
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Number of Reviews
40

Title
Review for Shrek (2001)
Directed by Andrew Adamson and Vicky Jenson
     The pleasure of Shrek is in its gleeful naughtiness, like a kid at 
the dinner table doing disgusting things with food to make a mother 
throw her hands up in mock despair.  The title character (adapted from 
the William Steig book of the same name) is an ogre who revels in 
revulsion.  He bathes in muck, brushes his teeth in slime, and pulls wax 
out of his ears to make candles.  And he wants nothing more than to be 
left alone.
     He's not evil, of course.  When the townspeople make their periodic 
forays with flaming torches into his swamp to slay or capture him, he 
scares them off good-naturedly, but he doesn't hurt them. 
     But things take an unacceptable turn when Shrek's swamp suddenly 
fills up with refugees - Pinocchio, the Seven Dwarfs, the Three Little 
Pigs, and a bunch of other fairytale creatures who have been exiled by 
Lord Farquaad (voice of John Lithgow), a pint-sized aristocrat so nasty 
he tortures the Gingerbread Man by dunking him in milk.  Shrek (Mike 
Myers doing his Fat Bastard brogue from Austin Powers) demands that the 
unwelcome intruders be removed, and Farquaad agrees on the condition 
that Shrek go fetch him a princess bride (Cameron Diaz), who is being 
held captive in a castle in a distant kingdom by a dragon.  Accompanied, 
much against his wishes, by his trusty sidekick Donkey (Eddie Murphy), 
he sets out to perform the feat and win back his lonely peace of mind.  
And before it's all over, adventures have been had and lessons have been 
learned.
     The story is fun on its primary level, helped mightily by the 
improvisational vocal antics of Eddie Murphy, whose ingratiating Donkey 
rattles on non-stop as he tags along with the reluctant ogre.  It's a 
character not unlike the little dragon he voiced in Disney's Mulan, and 
here the Dreamworks people poke a bit of fun at that by having the big 
dragon who's guarding the princess fall for Donkey. 
     In fact, the Dreamworks people have lots of fun at Disney's 
expense, providing another level of enjoyment for the grown-ups who take 
the kids to see this one.  The displaced characters who invade the swamp 
are clearly refugees from the Land of the Mouse, there is a brief 
send-up of Disneyland's maddening Small Small World attraction, and the 
nasty Lord Farquaad is said to bear a resemblance to Michael Eisner, 
head of Disney and nemesis of Shrek producer and Dreamworks chief 
Jeffrey Katzenberg, who was once Crown Prince of the Magic Kingdom 
before he and Eisner had a falling out and he was banished under a dark 
cloud.  (Eisner, however, is tall, and Katzenberg is short, so the 
diminutive Farquaad may be directing a wink at his own boss.)
     The writing is clever, although not quite up to Toy Story 
standards, and the animation is accomplished, although personally I miss 
the old style in which drawing was king.  These characters look like 
Play-Doh with bone structure; they occupy some uneasy territory between 
cartoon and real.  What they really remind me of is those old Viewmaster 
slides, where you would click your way through a story on a disc held in 
a red plastic viewer.  But the effects are wonderful, and the story is 
nicely acerbic, and there are none of those treacly Disney songs -- when 
Donkey tries to sing the ogre will only let him hum.  That alone is 
worth the price of admission.

Title
Review for Almost Famous (2000)
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe
     If you remember '70s rock, you'll swear you remember the band 
Stillwater and its Rolling Stone cover.  You may even have their album 
somewhere in your stack of yellowing, tape-patched LP jackets.  That's 
how real Cameron Crowe ("Jerry Maguire") makes the universe of his 
semi-autobiographical movie, "Almost Famous", with its improbable story 
of a 15-year-old rock critic touring with the band and writing a cover 
story for the 'zine of record of the record scene. 
     Improbable, but true.  Crowe was a teenage writer for Rolling 
Stone, he did tour with bands like Led Zeppelin and the Allman Brothers, 
and the stories and situations with which he packs this tender, 
romantic, and exhilarating love letter to a bygone era are drawn from 
life. 
     William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is young, younger even than he 
knows: his mother (Frances McDormand) has lied to him about his age as 
she pushes him forward in school.  An English professor of fierce 
intelligence and discipline, she won't even let rock records in the 
house ("Look," she says, confiscating a Simon & Garfunkel album from his 
older sister and pointing to their eyes on the cover.  "Drugs!")  But 
when his sister (Zooey Deschanel) runs away to become a stewardess, she 
leaves him her contraband cache of albums.  Leafing through the 
forbidden jackets, he discovers a minefield of exotic temptation.  He's 
sucked through the looking glass into the siren world of rock.
     His break comes when he meets the (real life) legendary rock critic 
Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who fills his ear with sage 
advice ("Don't become close to them.  These people are not your friends. 
 Friendship is the booze they feed you") and hires him to write a 
concert review.  There he meets the lovely Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), a 
groupie who rejects that nomenclature ("We're Band Aides.  We inspire 
the music.")  He also meets Stillwater, with its charismatic guitarist 
(Billy Crudup) and lead singer (Jason Lee), and makes enough of an 
impression that they invite him to tag along to L.A.
     The story line of "Almost Famous" is neither complex or important.  
It's a coming-of-age story, a loss-of-innocence story, an end-of-an-era 
story ("You're coming along at a dangerous time for rock 'n roll," Bangs 
tells William.  "The war's over and they [commercialism] have won.")  
But Crowe's unerring feel for the personalities and the moments make 
this movie soar.  There is a scene on the bus of Stillwater's "Almost 
Famous" tour which begins with the group sullenly isolated from each 
other following an ego-fueled dust-up.  Elton John's "Tiny Dancer" is 
playing, and gradually, almost reluctantly, they all begin tapping, 
humming, and finally singing joyfully along.  It's a paean to the 
healing power of music.
     There are a few minor potholes.  A confessional scene in a plane in 
a storm serves its purpose but feels a bit forced, ditto a scene in 
Rolling Stone's office trashing William's story.  A few lines smack of 
"I couldn't resist" - a reference to Mick Jagger at 50, and a ponderous 
coy line about the early days of faxing.  But most of it is perfect 
pitch.  One of the best moments has McDormand on the phone with Crudup, 
admonishing him to take good care of her baby, and wiping the rock star 
smirk off his face. 
     Fugit's debut balances innocence and savvy, and grows in maturity 
across the film's arc.  Hudson is luminous as the not quite invulnerable 
groupie, and she captures a couple of the film's most indelible scenes.  
In a performance that should catapult him out of the "If we can't get 
Brad Pitt" category, Crudup radiates sex appeal, self-confidence, and 
self-doubt, and Jason Lee does a deft mix of rock star charisma and 
neurosis.  All the cast is outstanding, from the overqualified 
Band-Aides (Anna Paquin and Fairuza Balk) to the look-alikes playing 
Rolling Stone editors Ben Fong-Torres and Jann Wenner.  Best of all are 
the flexibly puritanical McDormand and the hiply uncool Hoffman in 
terrific supporting roles that merit Oscar recognition. 
     "Almost Famous" is about what's real and what isn't, about love and 
friendship and hero-worship, about the loneliness common to cool and 
uncool, about the transitoriness of style and the staying power of 
intelligence.  Cameron Crowe combines them all in a movie that really 
rocks.

Title
Review for Shadow of the Vampire (2000)
     In his twilight years, sitting around the old actors' home, Willem 
Dafoe is not going to have to complain "I never got to really go over 
the top."  As Max Schreck, the ghoulish actor who created the 
unforgettable vampire in  F.W. Murnau's silent classic Nosferatu (1922), 
Dafoe pulls out all the stops, and he does it with a cackling, 
irresistible glee that goes straight for the jugular. 
     Shadow of the Vampire is writer Steven Katz and director E. Elias 
Merhige's riff on the making of Nosferatu, the first vampire movie and 
still the creepiest.  You get a bit of a history lesson with the price 
of admission; up to a point the movie draws on the facts of that 
landmark production.  Murnau was denied permission to adapt Bram 
Stoker's Dracula by the author's widow, a problem he solved by changing 
the title and rechristening his vampire Count Orlok.  Murnau also 
revolutionized movie-making by taking his camera out of the studio and 
going on location.  The names of the cast and crew are faithfully 
observed, as is the look of the period, down to the actors' makeup and 
the dusters and goggles worn by Murnau and his henchmen.
    And then there's Schreck, and here the filmmakers let the dogs of 
their imaginations run free.  Murnau's background was with the great Max 
Reinhardt's Berlin Staatstheater, and so was Schreck's, as far as we 
know.  In Shadow, Murnau (John Malkovich) tells his company that the 
actor he has hired to play Count Orlok is from Reinhardt's theater, but 
this guy is from Berlin the way the Coneheads were from France.  He's a 
disciple of Stanislavsky, Murnau says to explain why the actor is not 
around for the studio scenes; Schreck has traveled ahead to the Czech 
location to steep himself in the atmosphere, and he will only be seen in 
makeup and character.  (The name Schreck translates as "fear" or 
"horror".) 
     There's some self-consciousness to the exposition in the early 
scenes, which often happens when the filmmakers have a menu of 
information to serve.  But there are also generous helpings of clever 
writing and some marvelously atmospheric visual schemes, with the good 
easily outweighing the awkward.  There is also sound philosophy.  When 
the producer complains that the locals who will fill the background 
roles don't know how to act, Murnau replies "They don't need to act; 
they need to be."  And "We are scientists engaged in the creation of 
memory, but our memories will neither blur nor fade" is an observation 
that carries a twist of pathos now that so many early films have 
deteriorated beyond repair. 
      Shadow is more delicious fun than classic horror.  It's an 
allegory of the filmmaking process, but it doesn't let anything so 
abstract get in the way of its entertainment.  Merhige and Katz seize 
hold of their idea and drive it with clear-eyed relish from start to 
finish.   

Title
Review for Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001)
     In the great tradition of such classics as Mortal Kombat, Super 
Mario Brothers, and Wing Commander comes Tomb Raider, the latest entry 
in the video-game-to-movie sweepstakes.  And to give credit where credit 
is due, this one makes the transition with flair and invention.
It's a genre that has a built-in problem to overcome: video game 
addicts are used to doing, not just watching.  Here they'll have to rely 
on Lady Lara Croft (Angelina Jolie), the game's heroine, to take care of 
the action for them.  And they couldn't have found a better substitute.
Jolie is tough, athletic, cocky, brilliant, sexy, and a little 
vulnerable.  When I say vulnerable, I don't mean all soft and girlie.  
But prick her, and does she not bleed?  Evoke the image of her dead 
father (played by her real father, Jon Voight), and does she not become 
misty-eyed?  Otherwise, she's pretty invulnerable - she can swing 
through a withering hail of bullets with devil-may-care insouciance and 
never get a scratch. 
But she's tough on the set and the props.  She'd rather go through 
a wall than open a door, and if she wants to take a clock apart she uses 
a hammer.  At one point she reduces an ancient tomb to rubble, and when 
it turns out to be a private training facility in the basement of her 
manor house, one shudders at the thought of what the budget for her 
workouts must run per year.  Figuring she does these training exercises 
at least once a month, and estimating repairs and construction of new 
tomb sets, with overtime, at about $5 million per, the only way it 
becomes cost effective is because she's in the business of saving the 
world.
The video game's producers insisted on star approval, and their 
other deal-breaker was a ban on nudity.  So it was a pleasant surprise 
to come upon a shower scene early in the action, following which Ms. 
Jolie drops her towel in front of her butler (Chris Barrie), who primly 
reproves her, noting that "A lady should be modest."  "Yes," she 
ripostes with saucy irony, "a lady should be modest."  There is equal 
time for admirers of the other gender in a shower scene featuring one of 
the male leads (Daniel Craig), who plays an entire nude scene Peter 
Sellers-like, with the area between hip bone and mid-thigh cannily 
obscured by camera angles and furniture.
There is a plot, and it is constructed along the conventions of a 
video game, with the player facing challenges of increasing degrees of 
difficulty.  The goal is to find the two severed halves of an icon 
called the Triangle of Light before the bad guys do.  The bad guys are a 
secret society called the Illuminati that wants to, would you believe 
it, rule the world, which they will be able to do with this gizmo 
because it controls time.  The catch is that the two halves are hidden 
in secret tombs in far corners of the globe, and they must be joined at 
the precise moment of the alignment of all the planets, which is 
happening in a couple of days and then not again for five thousand 
years.  The Illuminati have set rival tomb raider Manfred Powell (Iain 
Glen) on the trail, and if you didn't already know he was a bad guy your 
alarms would flash when he says patronizingly to Lara "I hear you're 
quite the little archaeologist yourself."
Tomb Raider borrows with good-natured liberality from a lot of very 
recognizable sources.  At the head of the list is Raiders of the Lost 
Ark, with plenty of James Bond stirred (not shaken) in.  There's a cute 
riff on the Pink Panther movies, with an electronic Cato robot 
programmed for surprise attacks Lara. 
Tomb Raider stomped the competition over the weekend, raking in 
nearly 50 million  at the box office, which lends a prescient quality to 
a line uttered by the chief Illuminatus:  "If one tomb raider is good, 
two tomb raiders will be even better." 

Title
Review for Kid, The (2000)
     Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is an overbearing, insulting, obnoxious 
PR consultant.  When he's called a jerk four times in one scene, he asks 
his assistant Amy (Emily Mortimer) if that makes it true.  "No," she 
says, "four times is a pattern.  It takes five times to be a fact."  
Shortly thereafter she calls him a jerk, and that was good enough for 
me.
     The premise of this comedy is that Russ needs serious help from his 
inner child to overcome his personality impediment, and through the 
magic of Disney, that help incarnates as his 8-year-old self, Rusty 
(Spencer Breslin).   Nobody seems to have much trouble accepting this 
curious phenomenon, and there's precious little explanation of how it 
happened, but Rusty looks as if he may have climbed out of a Campbell's 
Soup can. 
     Of all the under-explained phenomena in the movie, the 
undermost-explained is why people like Russ so much.  On the one hand 
we're shown what an obnoxious prick he is, and on the other we see 
people beaming at him and falling in love with him.  Maybe it's because 
he looks like Bruce Willis.  Amy admits that every time she's ready to 
leave, she gets a glimpse of the kid in him, and she just melts.
     Russ has spent his adult life overcoming the dweeb he was as a kid, 
and little Rusty is no more pleased to see how he turns out ("A dogless, 
chickless guy with a tick!")  The challenge is for each to change the 
other, and this movie has no conscience about that old "never mess with 
the past" caveat.  There's a surprise guest appearance by yet a third 
Russ character to round things off.
      Willis, who seems to have partitioned his career into the action 
Bruce Willis and the sensitive Bruce Willis here again shows his sweet, 
child-loving side, and Breslin overcomes some inept early scenes (but 
heck, he's only 8) to do an ingratiating job.  Best are Lily Tomlin as 
Russ's wry secretary ("How's Mini-you?"), and Jean Smart (Guinevere) as 
an understanding client.  A witty screenplay by Audrey Wells (Guinevere) 
helps carry this movie safely into the "fun for the family" zone.  But 
it's not recommended for diabetics.

Title
Review for Place Vendôme (1998)
Written and Directed by Nicole Garcia
     There are great pleasures to this silkily adult thriller set in the 
murky world of precious stones, and none is greater, silkier, or more 
adult that the presence of the great Catherine Deneuve.  As beautiful in 
her late fifties as she was in her early twenties, Ms. Deneuve has long 
since justified the Best Actress awards she won as a newcomer in The 
Umbrellas of Cherbourg (1964).
     She's never been better than she is here as Marianne Malivert, the 
dipsomaniac wife (and before too long, widow) of the head of one of the 
great jewelry firms of Paris's famed Place Vendome.  When we first meet 
her, she's virtually a full-time resident of a private alcohol clinic.  
But the sudden death of her husband (Bernard Fresson) shakes her out of 
it, and re-armed with her former expertise as a diamond specialist and 
in possession of a cache of stolen gems he showed her before he drove 
his car into a truck, she penetrates the dark and dangerous shadows of 
the diamond trade, from De Beers in London to the burrows of Antwerp in 
an effort to secure her future.
     Actress-turned-writer/director Nicole Garcia keeps the mind 
churning by gradually revealing knots and tangles as she spools out her 
story.  There are multiple links between many of the characters, of both 
a professional and a romantic character, but we only discover them bit 
by bit.  There is a determined rejection of consistency, that hobgoblin 
of little minds; instead Garcia challenges us with shifting attitudes 
and character traits.  Marianne is a drunk; when she sobers up, she can 
still slip without falling apart.  Her feelings toward the beautiful 
Nathalie (Emmanuelle Seignier) range unapologetically from hostility to 
empathy.  Strong performances from Jacques Dutronc and Jean-Pierre Bacri 
as a couple of the men in her life draw the twisted skein of this story 
tighter.  "Love means getting lied to and betrayed," Marianne muses, and 
mendacity and betrayal in love and business are at the heart of this 
often difficult but always rewarding film noir.

Title
Review for George Washington (2000)
Written & Directed by David Gordon Green
      First off, let's be clear: this movie is not about George 
Washington.  Expect no powdered wigs, no wooden teeth, no dollars across 
the Potomac.  It is a movie about the end of childhood, the end of 
innocence, but despite one shocking tragedy, it is an innocence that 
trails off under the weight of its own inevitability.
     The movie centers around a group of pre-teens in a small, decaying 
southern town.  Most of them are black, but it's a racially mixed 
society.  The narrator is Nasia (Candace Evanofski), a self-possessed 
12-year-old who has just broken up with Buddy (Curtis Cotton III) 
because, as she tells their older friend Vernon (Damien Jewan Lee), he's 
too immature.  "He's thirteen, you're twelve," says the exasperated 
Vernon, "you're supposed to be little kids!"  Nasia has transferred her 
affections to George (Donald Holden), pretty much without George's 
participation or consent.  Buddy sighs "I miss having her to talk to 
about my feelings," which doesn't sound all that immature.
     Aside from the tragedy, nothing much happens.  This movie has 
little to do with story.  It has to do with moments.  It's 
impressionistic, bits of light captured with short strokes, the languor 
of everyday life reflected in a defiantly uneventful style, beautifully 
photographed by Tim Orr (on film, not digital, an unusual pleasure in a 
contemporary no-budget picture.)  Girls brush each other's hair and talk 
about boys and kissing.  Boys roughhouse and splash in the public 
swimming pool.  George adopts a stray dog, which he has to keep hidden 
because his Uncle Damascus (Eddie Rouse) hates animals.
     Perhaps as much as anything it's about dreaming.  Vernon and his 
nine-year-old white girlfriend Sonya (Rachael Handy) dream of getting 
away together, and abortively steal a car.  Buddy dreams of getting 
Nasia back; he also dons a rubber dragon mask to change his identity.  
Nasia dreams of what a great man George will be.  And George dreams of 
being a superhero.  "I want to be the strongest man in the world," he 
says.  George is soft in the head, both figuratively and literally - he 
has to wear a helmet. After he's acclaimed a hero for saving a boy from 
drowning, despite the fact that he's not supposed to go in the water 
because of his fragile head, he dons a superhero's cape and tights for 
the rest of the picture. 
     First feature director David Gordon Green has assembled a cast of 
non-actors, and they're wonderful.  As a general rule, the younger they 
are the better they are; only some of the young adult men show a visible 
self-consciousness in front of the camera. 
     Evanofski's narrative voice is reminiscent of Terence Malick's Days 
of Heaven, and so is the sleepy semi-pastoral style.  "I like to go to 
beautiful places," she says, "where there's waterfalls and empty 
fields." 

Title
Review for Naturally Native (1998)
Directed by Jennifer Wynne Farmer and Valerie Red-Horse
     Naturally Native, the first movie by, about, and starring Native 
American women, is at its core a  story of identity crisis.  In its 
specifics it's about Indian issues, but part of the irresistibility of 
this maiden effort from co-directors Jennifer Wynne Farmer and Valerie 
Red-Horse (from a screenplay by Red-Horse) is the breadth of its appeal. 
     Three young sisters of the California Viejas tribe are adopted by a 
white woman when their alcoholic mother dies giving birth to the 
youngest.  They grow up in a Presbyterian Anglo world.  Vickie (Valerie 
Red-Horse) is the eldest, and the only one with memories of life on the 
reservation.  She's now 33, with a loving husband (Pato Hoffman), and 
two kids, living in the pleasant San Fernando Valley suburban house 
where she and her sisters were raised.  Karen (Kimberly Norris 
Guerrero), the middle sister, has just finished business school, and is 
living there too while she contemplates a job offer in Chicago.  The 
youngest, Tanya (Irene Bedard), has also moved home to regroup after a 
failed stab at show business.
     Vickie, the only one to have returned to the reservation and talked 
to their father before he died, has herbal lore that she learned from 
him.  She has recipes for everything from burn cream to shampoo, and the 
sisters hit on the idea of marketing these products.  Armed with Karen's 
solid business plan, they go looking for a small business loan to get 
started.  But everywhere they turn they're rebuffed - for not being 
Indian enough, for being too Indian, for being the wrong kind of Indian, 
or for variations on those themes.  The most entertaining of these 
scenes (and they're all good) involves Mary Kay Place as a spiritualist 
trading on the vogue in Native American ways. 
     The movie deals with a range of Indian issues, from alcohol 
intolerance to casinos to ethnic identity.  But it seldom beats us over 
the head.  The filmmakers, not always able to avoid moments of 
exposition and didacticism, have the grace and skill to skip right by 
them, recovering with such charm and sincerity that we forgive the 
moments as soon as they're past.
     At the center of this movie, in virtually every respect, is the 
wonderful Valerie Red-Horse, who wrote and co-directed, and who anchors 
the story with her intelligently appealing and layered performance as 
the feisty, indomitable, and sometimes insecure suburban housewife.  
Guerrero is also excellent as the sweet-tempered business whiz, and 
although Bedard's flibbertigibbet is annoying in places, she redeems the 
character as the story progresses.  Pato adds a strong anchor as 
Vickie's husband.
     The sisters are genetically Native American, spiritually Christian, 
culturally Anglo, a mini-lost tribe within a society that sometimes 
embraces them, sometimes rejects them, and sometimes victimizes them.  
But significantly, they're strong individuals who take responsibility 
for themselves.  Farmer and Red-Horse have a lot to say about identity 
and feminism, but they're secure enough to have fun with it, even 
reaching into the Victoria's Secret catalogue for some playful 
image-tweaking.  They've made an issue movie that is thoughtful without 
being preachy, confrontational without being angry, a movie that's 
funny, romantic, inclusive, and downright satisfying.

Title
Review for Gone in Sixty Seconds (2000)
     Producer Jerry Bruckheimer, in a philanthropic moment, bought the 
rights to a grade C 1974 quickie called Gone In 60 Seconds, which was 
made by a guy named H.B. Halicki and is remembered, if it is remembered 
at all, for a 40-minute car chase.  Halicki himself was gone in short 
order, erased in an accident while filming a sequel. 
     Both movies involve stealing a lot of cars, and driving recklessly 
and very fast.  A less sensitive man than Bruckheimer might not have 
felt this was worth paying the big bucks for, but Jerry's the man who 
brought us The Rock and Armageddon, so he has certain standards to 
maintain. 
     Bruckheimer veteran Nic Cage is the central character, an ex-car 
thief known even to his family as Memphis.  Cage once won a Best Actor 
Oscar, but he's been trying successfully to live it down ever since.  
Memphis is going straight, working at a go-kart track with little kids, 
but his brother (Giovanni Ribisi) has run afoul of a homicidal crime 
boss (Christopher Eccleston), and Memphis has to heist 50 high-end autos 
in a night to save the lad's bacon. 
     Gone In 60 Seconds  is all speed and shiny surfaces, with odd 
little moments of pathos spotted in to support Bruckheimer's assertion 
that this movie is "character driven".   Driven, yes; character, no.
     I could tell you how Memphis puts together a "team", and mention 
names like Robert Duvall, but that would give you false hope.  I could 
mention Delroy Lindo, reduced here to an Inspector Javert-like detective 
who grouses "I should have put you away when I had the chance," sounding 
like George Bush bitching to Saddam Hussein.   I could mention Angelina 
Jolie, yet another Oscar winner, but that would give you the impression 
that there's a female presence here.  I couldn't figure for the life of 
me what Jolie was doing in the movie, except to ponder with Cage the 
question "Which is better, boosting cars or sex?"
     The answer is neither, when it becomes as monotonously repetitive 
as it does here.  Boosting one car could be pretty exciting.  Boosting 
50 is just plain tedious.  It's like one of those tours that takes you 
to 12 European cities in 6 days. 
     If all you ask for in a movie is lots of car chases, you'll find 
plenty of that in this one.  Memphis's main automotive squeeze is a '67 
Shelby Mustang GT 500 (similar to the car  Steve McQueen drove in 
Bullitt.)  Her name is Eleanor, and he comes a lot closer to orgasm with 
her than he does with Angelina Jolie.

Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
     Tarsem is a successful director of music videos who has added the 
gravitas of a last name, Singh, for his first foray into feature films.  
You'd think "Singh" would work for the musical stuff, and could be 
dropped when he went tuneless (unless you count Howard Shore's 
cacophonous score.)  But I digress...
     His attitude toward movies seems to be that it doesn't matter what 
you say or do as long as it looks good.  And at times it looks very 
good.  The opening, with Jennifer Lopez swathed in brilliant white 
pacing the knife-edged tops of dramatically shadowed desert dunes, is 
the pure distilled essence of an expensive commercial.  She is at the 
time prowling the subconscious of a small boy (more on this later), and 
we can only assume that this is a small boy who will grow up to be a 
fashion photographer - these are not images that dominate the 
subconscious of your typical prepubescent male.
     All right, here's the deal - she's a psychologist working in an 
experimental scientific program that allows her, suspended in midair in 
a form-fitting corrugated body suit alongside her patient, to enter the 
kid's subconscious and find out what's gone wrong in there.  The science 
is reminiscent of '50s sci-fi potboilers.  Things aren't so bad in the 
little boy's brain, but they take a turn for the worse when FBI agent 
Novak (Vince Vaughn) finds out about this program and recruits her to 
take a side trip into the brain of a comatose serial killer (Vincent 
D'Onofrio), who has a victim stashed somewhere and there's no time to 
lose!
     Singh cares little enough about dialogue that he allows 
screenwriter Mark Protosevich lines like "If we can't stop him, he ain't 
gonna stop himself," and to be on the safe side he imports plot and 
style elements from movies as diverse as "Silence of the Lambs", 
"Altered States", and the animated "Fantastic Planet".  He has stocked 
his cast with middle-echelon stars, and seems not to have wasted much 
time directing them, with the result that Lopez spends most of her time 
trying to look sympathetic and concerned, Vaughn looks worried and a 
little lost, and D'Onofrio just looks crazy.  Ultimately, Singh is 
banking everything on his slick visuals, and while sometimes he nails 
it, as often as not it gets away from him.  A recurring image of 
Jennifer Lopez as the Virgin Mary is one that could be charitably 
forgotten.
     If you like shots of kidnapped young women being systematically 
drowned in a plexiglass cell, screaming "Daddy!  Mommy!  Help!" as the 
water level rises, you'll be treated to them randomly throughout the 
movie.  If you're fond of disemboweling and vivisection, look no 
further.  If you're a fan of crisp story, character, and credibility, 
hang in there.  Something's bound to turn up soon.

Title
Review for Space Cowboys (2000)
Screenplay by Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
     There are 261 years of charm and experience at the core of Clint 
Eastwood's immensely likeable geezer-pleaser -- to wit: James Garner, 
72; Eastwood, 70; Donald Sutherland, 66; and wandering in off the 
playground, Tommy Lee Jones clocking in at a mere 53.  Tommy Lee is a 
very appealing actor with a face that looks as though it had been left 
out in the rain and sun to weather, but as we keep observing about the 
love interests with whom these guys share their cinematic beds, couldn't 
they have found somebody of a more appropriate age? 
     Together they compose Team Daedelus, a reunited crew that had the 
right stuff but the wrong timing back in 1958, when they should have 
been the first men in space.  Now there's a Russian "communications 
satellite" that's coming apart and threatening to fall to earth, and 
there's only one man who understands its antiquated guidance system 
enough to fix it.  That man is Eastwood, and he understands it because 
he designed it, before it was stolen and wound up in the Cold War hands 
of the Russkies. 
     There's no time to train buff youngsters.  Clint will have to go up 
himself.  And the only way he'll do that is with his old Team Daedelus 
buddies.  When project director James Cromwell objects, Eastwood tells 
him to take it or leave it.  "The clock's ticking," he growls, "and I'm 
not getting any younger."
     What makes this movie so much fun is not just the Team Methuselah 
fantasy of four old guys showing they can still cut it with the young 
stallions.  It's the guys themselves.  In our disposable society, it is 
surpassingly great to see guys like Garner and Sutherland deliver the 
goods.  When a NASA scientist (Marcia Gay Harden, with a hairdo 
patterned on the Liberty Bell) asks what she should call them, 
Sutherland replies with a twinkling leer "You can call me.anytime."  
It's not a fresh line, but Sutherland serves it up like steak tartare. 
     Eastwood opens with a black-and-white sequence as four young actors 
(voices dubbed by the older stars) take us back to the days of '58.  
Then, like Dorothy landing in Oz, we burst into color as the present-day 
Clint accepts his assignment and proceeds, in the time-honored Dirty 
Dozen/Magnificent Seven tradition, to round up his geriatric compadres 
from their current walks of life.  We follow them through NASA training, 
and finally blast off with them on the mission.  At this point the plot 
thickens, the technology quickens, and the movie takes on the feel of 
another space adventure - and an entertaining one at that.  But where it 
earns its stripes is on the ground as it revels in the sly, understated 
craft of its all-star team of old pros.

Title
Review for Mexican, The (2001)
     Major motion picture studios may be dumb, but they're not stupid.  
When you get a movie starring a couple of golden kids like Julia Roberts 
and Brad Pitt opening on March 2nd, chances are there were a few 
bomb-sniffing dogs on the prowl somewhere up in the Perrier-stocked 
suites of the front office. 
     Do Julia and Brad have chemistry?  It's hard to tell.  For most of 
this two-hours-but-feels-longer movie, they're in different countries.  
She's heading for Las Vegas, where she hopes to get a job as a waitress 
with an option to move up to casino dealer.  He's in Mexico trying to 
get possession of a gold-plated antique gun (the eponymous "Mexican") 
for his mob bosses.  Instead, she gets kidnapped by hitman James (The 
Sopranos) Gandolfini (does anybody ever consider casting Gandolfini as 
an ambassador or an art dealer?), who's been sent by mob types to make 
sure Brad delivers the gun.  Brad, meanwhile, is having problems of his 
own south of the border with corpses and dogs and larcenous types.  We 
see them together at the very beginning, when she throws his clothes out 
of the window (and couldn't we have lived without ever seeing that 
cliche again), and at the end, with a few telephone tirades strung 
into the middle. 
     There is some rewarding chemistry, but it comes from the 
Roberts-Gandolfini tandem, which may explain why Julia and Brad get so 
little face time.  She experiences a bit of Stockholm Syndrome, becoming 
emotionally involved with her captor.  Not romantically - A) because he 
resembles Yogi Berra, and B) because he's gay.  Instead, he gets to be 
the Gay Friend, and in some of the movie's best scenes, they perform 
couple counseling on each other.  In a moment of questionable taste, she 
admits she was initially offended when she asked if he was going to rape 
her and he said "Not very likely," but feels much better when she finds 
out his sexual orientation.
     It's a comedy-adventure.  You know it's comedy because of the 
clothes-defenestration scene - that happens seldom in real life and 
never in drama - and from Brad saying lines like : "When you told me to 
pick up the thing at the thing, well, Samantha, she wanted the car to 
pick up some things."  Periodically it forgets that it's 
comedy-adventure, and then people get killed in messy and unamusing 
ways.
     "The Mexican", the gun for possession of which the denizens of this 
movie (and we) go through so much, turns out to be cursed.  Unless it's 
in the right hands, it backfires. 
     There's a cheap quip there, but I wouldn't touch it for a free 
weekend in Cab San Lucas.

Title
Review for Evolution (2001)
     Inside the business these days movies are referred to as "product," 
and Evolution is a prime example of why.  It has been assembled with the 
wit and artistry of vegetarian sausage, and it delivers about the same 
amount of entertainment value. 
Apparently the idea was originally for a serious/scary sci-fi 
flick, but when it reached director Ivan Reitman it reminded him just 
enough of his '84 hit Ghostbusters that he decided to make it into a 
comedy, and now it will remind you too of Ghostbusters, but not in a 
good way.  For actors, they began with David Duchovny, because it was a 
space alien story.  They matched him up with black comic Orlando Jones 
so they could do witty racial repartee ("Dark meat or white?"  "What do 
you think?"), and fleshed it out with zingers like "Are you going to 
finish that bacon?"  "Of course I'm going to finish it.  I ordered it, 
didn't I?"  They found Oscar nominee Julianne Moore with time on her 
hands and used her talents to play a CDC scientist who bumps into things 
and does pratfalls. 
When they were though chuckling over that, they turned it over to 
the special effects wizards to create some digital alien and prehistoric 
creatures, ranging from cute to scary, and then they polished the whole 
thing up with flatulence jokes and anus probe jokes and, just in case it 
was getting too highbrow, they let Duchovny pull down his trousers and 
flash a moon through a car windshield.  I can't remember when I've 
laughed like that. 
Duchovny plays Dr. Ira Kane, head of an Arizona community college 
science department.  He used to be a top army scientist, till he 
administered an experimental anthrax vaccine to troops which had some 
bad side effects (like diarrhea and uncontrollable flatulence!)  He and 
fellow community college scientist Harry Block (Jones) are called to the 
site of a meteor that has burrowed into the Arizona desert, and they 
soon find that it contains an alien life form that starts as primal ooze 
but evolves at breathtaking speed into higher and higher orders of 
creature. 
The military takes over.  The officer in charge (Ted Levine) turns 
out to be Kane's old army colleague and nemesis, and starts sabotaging 
him.  Julianne Moore turns up as a CDC scientist and bumps into things.  
Danny Ayckroyd arrives as the Governor of Arizona.  The human race is 
threatened with extinction. The army screws up and creates a giant 
monster, and Kane and his pals have to save the earth by spraying a Head 
& Shoulders enema up the monster's anal sphincter - surely one of the 
worst product placement choices in history. 

Title
Review for Well, The (1997)
Screenplay by Laura Jones, from the novel by Elizabeth Jolley
     Samantha Lang's debut feature, an exercise in character and 
creepiness steeped in a deep azure as if the print had been thrown in 
the wash with the colored clothes, is a test of patience.  That patience 
is ultimately rewarded, but it requires slogging through an awfully slow 
set-up.  Even in the payoff things never get too lively, but they do get 
intense.
     Lang begins in media res with the pivotal scene of the movie: two 
women, one dour and spinsterly and the other young and giddy, leave a 
late-night dance at a remote bar in the Australian outback.  The young 
one drives, recklessly, and kills a stranger on a lonely road.  Hester 
dumps the body down a dry well on her property.
     We now go back to discover how we got here.  Katharine (Miranda 
Otto), a recent reform school graduate, arrives as a sort of housekeeper 
at the farm where Hester (Pamela Rabe) lives with her old and dotty 
father.  The father soon dies, and Hester promptly sells the homestead 
and moves with Katharine into a smaller place.  They stow the cash a 
couple of cookie tins on top of a dresser, and begin to fantasize about 
a trip they'll take to Europe and New York. 
     Rabe plays Hester with the restraint and permanence of a part of 
the landscape.  She's a woman to whom the word "fun" has probably never 
occurred.  But she soon falls under the spell of, and in love with, the 
flighty Kathy, putting up with her rock music, buying her clothes and 
gifts, learning to laugh a little, and hiring another housekeeper so she 
won't have so much work.  Otto, a scruffy down-under Jodie Foster, 
combines tease, innocence, exuberance, spoiledness, and something 
darker.
     Then comes the accident, followed by the discovery that the money 
is missing.  Could the man Kathy hit have robbed them?  Is the money on 
him?  Kathy seems to go a little nuts.  She insists that he's alive down 
in the well, and that he's in love with her.  The mind games play out, 
in deep, sinister swirls of blue.  If you're still there at the end 
you'll either have had a nice nap, or you won't sleep easy for a while.

Title
Review for Erleuchtung garantiert (2000)
All right.  It's a lot better than it sounds.  Veteran director 
Doris Dorrie, who made her reputation in 1985 with Men., matches up her 
frequent collaborator Uwe Ochsenknecht with newcomer Gustav Peter Wohler 
as a pair of bumbling German brothers who travel to Japan for a retreat 
in a Buddhist monastery.  Both actors do a wonderful job. 
The story divides into three parts.  The first, and funniest, 
introduces us to the brothers at home in Munich, where Uwe is a salesman 
in a kitchen showroom, and Gustav is a Feng Shui consultant.  Uwe has a 
wife and four screaming children, and comes home one day to find his 
wife fed up and gone, taking the kids and the furniture with her.  He 
cries drunkenly on Gustav's shoulder, and begs his brother to take him 
along on his long-planned trip to the Monzen Monastery outside of Tokyo. 
 When he sobers up the next day and realizes the folly of his request, 
it's too late - Gustav has bought him a ticket, and there's no getting 
out of it.
Part two chronicles the misadventures of the brothers in the neon 
jungle of Tokyo, and while the humor holds up fairly well, it begins to 
show its age and effort as it dips into territory covered many times in 
movies like The Out-of-Towners.  In material that is more gag-based than 
reality-based, they get lost, lose their money and credit cards, and 
wind up sleeping in cartons and working in a German beer hall on the 
Ginza Strip to hustle the train fare to the monastery.
Part three is at the monastery, and this is where you'll need all 
your reserves of enlightenment to keep laughing.  Life in a monastery is 
made up of a lot of repetitive routines, and they are repeated and 
repeated here.  While this makes for good enlightenment, it makes for 
slow comedy.  But the opportunity for a look at life inside a Zen 
monastery is some recompense.  Interestingly, Uwe - the loutish salesman 
with no background or interest in Eastern philosophy - takes to the life 
better than his brother.  There's a sort of Zen Murphy's Law at work in 
the monastery, and what can go wrong for them does go wrong.  But by 
degrees they both learn to let go and accept the peace and beauty of the 
here and now, and emerge from Monzen very different from the men who 
went in. 
Dorrie teaches graduate film students in Munich, and she was 
inspired to make this when her students balked at her challenge to them 
to make a movie using the new Digital technology.  "Okay, if you won't 
do it," she thought, "I will."  The medium fit the meditative message 
perfectly: she was able to "leave everything behind," and make her movie 
using a single cameraman and a crew that fit into one car.  But the look 
of the movie reads much richer than such simplicity would lead one to 
expect.  Cameraman Hans Karl Hu has captured some wonderful shots, 
including a classic overhead shot of pedestrians crossing a busy 
downtown Tokyo intersection.  And Dorrie reminds us of what she's up to 
technically by having Uwe record their adventures with his own hand-held 
digital video camera. 
As the Abbot of Monzen explains, enlightenment is not the 
achievement of something, but the absence of something.  As the movie 
moves along, it discards its laughs along with the other worldly 
baggage, but a lot of quiet smiles remain.  And Santa Fe, a veritable 
hotbed of enlightenment, should provide the ideal audience for this 
story.      

Title
Review for Duets (2000)
     "Duets" isn't a very good movie, but it has moments so good that 
you almost forgive it.  It takes place in the world of karaoke, that 
fading phenomenon that gives people a chance to be a star for three 
minutes (one-fifth of the Warhol lifetime allowance.)
     The good moments are not much to be seen early.  It's all dim 
lighting, bad blocking, and missed moments.  A karaoke hustler (Huey 
Lewis) plays the rube, lays some side bets, and then blows away the 
competition.  It's no news that Huey Lewis can handle a song, but the 
scene doesn't rise to the occasion.  Other characters are introduced - 
his estranged chorus girl daughter (Gwynneth Paltrow, director Bruce 
Paltrow's daughter), a salesman weary of his job and his life (Paul 
Giamatti), an ex-con guilty of "an error in judgment" (Andre Braugher), 
a cab driver and a karaoke singer (Scott Speedman, Maria Bello).  The 
most intriguing insight the movie offers is that fellatio is more 
dependable currency than frequent flyer miles. 
     But there are music scenes that really take off, particularly those 
involving Giamatti and Braugher, who also provide the most interesting 
duet of the proceedings, thanks more to their playing than to the 
hackneyed script.  Their "Try a Little Tenderness" got people whooping 
in the movie theater (although Braugher's singing is dubbed.)  Gwynneth 
Paltrow does well as a sweet dim bulb, and shows off a beautiful voice.  
     It's TV veteran Paltrow's first theatrical feature since '82 ("A 
Little Sex"), and you won't leave the theater wondering why.

Title
Review for Coming to Light: Edward S. Curtis and the North American Indians (2000)
COMING TO LIGHT: EDWARD S. CURTIS AND THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS
Voices of Sheila Tousey, Bill Pullman
     The culture and history of the North American Indian were passed 
down orally from generation to generation.  When the Europeans came and 
subjugated the indigenous peoples of this continent, they did their best 
to eradicate the native traditions.  They did it by slaughter, and they 
did it by enforced reeducation, sending Indian children to regimented 
schools to learn the white man's religions and ways, and punishing them 
for speaking their own languages.  Native Americans were herded onto 
reservations, and their wardens did their best to stamp out the 
traditional dances and ceremonies.  By the turn of the century, it was 
clear to anybody who cared to look that the Indian ways were headed for 
extinction, and that they would largely vanish without a trace.
     One who cared to look was Edward S. Curtis, a society studio 
photographer from Seattle who developed a passionate interest in this 
doomed culture.  He spent thirty years documenting the Indians of North 
America, with photographs, motion pictures, and sound recordings.  He 
produced a stunning series of  20 volumes of photographs and text 
covering the native tribes.  He spent all his own money and some of J.P. 
Morgan's, impaired his health and destroyed his marriage.  For his 
pains, his work was soon forgotten, his collection of prints and plates 
sold in bulk to a Boston second-hand bookseller, where they lay 
collecting dust in a basement for decades until they were discovered by 
a clerk in the early '70s, and the Curtis revival commenced.
     Anne Makepeace's engrossing documentary traces Curtis's career and 
shows his work, and asks contemporary Native Americans to comment on the 
Curtis oeuvre.  There are some who resent it, who feel that the old 
photographs serve to arrest spirits that otherwise would have moved on.  
More, though, appreciate the magnificent photographs, and treasure the 
historical record and the link it provides with an Indian past that 
would otherwise be lost.  Some recognize relatives, or themselves, or 
have even used the Curtis photographs to reconstruct traditional dances 
that haven't been performed in half a century or more.
     In the 1920s Curtis visited Alaska's Nunivak Island, an Indian 
community as yet undiscovered by Christian missionaries and white 
settlers.  He was struck by the idyllic sense of well-being and joy 
among the inhabitants, and it shows in the pictures he took.  Within a 
decade Swedish missionaries had arrived, and pulled the plug on this 
Eden. 

Title
Review for Ratcatcher (1999)
     Lynne Ramsay's first feature is set in the grim and grimy world of 
Glasgow's public housing projects, during a garbage strike that has left 
the already bleak cityscape strewn with mountains of black plastic bags 
where rats swarm and children play.  And yet it's not exactly about 
poverty.  Ramsay's characters have food and shelter, decent clothing,  
telly, and dance records.  They have a subsistence level of comfort.  
What they don't have is hope.
     Ramsay, a former still photographer, begins her film with the 
almost still image of a little boy twisting inside a plastic shower 
curtain.  It suggests a caul, or a shroud, or a ghost.  The sound is 
muted, the action is in extreme slow motion, until the boy's mother 
cuffs him and tells him to stop messing with her shower curtain, and 
sends him outside to play.  He meets a friend, James, they horse around 
in the shallow canal that runs by the projects, and a moment later he's 
drowned. 
     "That wasn't your main character," Ramsay is telling us, "this is 
your main character," and the next hour and a half deals with the 
forlorn, guilt-heavy existence of skinny, pinch-faced, jug-eared James 
(William Eadie).  Or perhaps she's offering the thought that they're 
interchangeable, these children trapped in an environment from which 
there seems to be no escape.
     But of course they're not interchangeable.  James has little in 
common with the gang of thuggish older boys who pick on him and 
gang-bang the resigned, compliant 14-year-old Margaret Anne (Leanne 
Mullen).  But then James is still pre-adolescent; there's no telling 
what changes a few more years in the projects might bring.
     His parents (Tommy Flanagan and Mandy Matthews) have had a few more 
years in the projects, though they're still young.  Their dream is to 
get out of the projects - into new projects which are being built in a 
wheat field on the edge of town.  James finds his way there on a bus, 
and spends a rapturous afternoon exploring the half-finished apartments 
and imagining, a scene reminiscent of the Joad children at the model 
camp in The Grapes of Wrath.  But eventually, of course, urban sprawl 
will encompass the new buildings and drag them down, and future 
generations will plot and dream to escape them.
     Ramsay has a wonderful eye and ear for her characters, and a gift 
for imagery.  Unfortunately much of the movie is dark, murky, groping 
its hand-held way through impenetrable shadows.  But she sketches her 
story without pathos, and without heavy-handed symbolism.  Water serves 
as a vehicle for casual death.  It's also the setting for a lovely scene 
where James and Margaret Anne take a bath together, as comfortable and 
unerotic as an old married couple.  And it provides a moment of heroism 
for James's Da, who rescues a boy from drowning, gets a medal, and 
probably messes up his family's chances for the new housing project.  
The boy he saves is a simpleminded friend of James's who, amidst the 
swarming vermin of the garbage strike, gets a pet white mouse for his 
birthday, and sends it on a strange trip.
     Ratcatcher is spoken in an urban Scots brogue so thick that the 
filmmakers have wisely subtitled it in English, reminiscent of an early 
Ken Loach film like Kes. 

Title
Review for Autumn in New York (2000)
     He (Richard Gere) is a silver-haired womanizer with nearly a 
half-century under his belt, owner-chef of the kind of trendy New York 
restaurant where salad costs 35 bucks.  She (Wynona Ryder) is an 
adorable pixie-haired gamine of 22, from a Manhattan socialite family 
that can afford that salad.  She makes cute hats out of wire, and has a 
bum ticker.  "Nobody thought I'd last this long," she tells him.  They 
fall in love.  As his best friend (Anthony LaPaglia) points out, "she's 
the perfect woman for you -- young, beautiful, and on the way out."
     She may be young and doomed, but she represents three generations 
of her family: herself, her tough old granny (Elaine Stritch), and her 
mother, now dead, with whom Gere once was in love back in the '70s.  
"She never slept with him," Granny assures her, to eliminate any taint 
of something vaguely incestuous,  "She was too old-fashioned for that."  
     For romantic small talk, he tells her about her mother.  "Her 
favorite singer was Stephen Stills."  She is of course too young to 
remember Stills, which probably explains why she doesn't seem familiar 
with this plot either.
     In the beginning they giggle a lot, and she sasses him with smart 
talk.  "Do you think I'm too old for you?"  "No, I collect antiques."  
By the end, there are a lot of brave smiles, and the smart talk has 
turned poignant.  "You've ruined me for other women."  "No, I've saved 
you for them."
     His womanizing is legend, but she starts right in to devote her few 
remaining mortal months to changing him.  When he boffs an old flame at 
a party, she finds out by putting her hand on his heart to see if he's 
lying (he is).  Boy loses girl.  Boy grovels.  Boy gets another chance.
     Gere and Ryder are both decent actors, but they inhabit separate 
spaces here.  It's not necessarily a generation gap problem, although 
today we're much more sensitive to that than in the days when Audrey 
Hepburn was wooed and won by Bogart (30 years her senior) in Sabrina, 
Cooper (28 years) in Love in the Afternoon, and Grant (25 years) in 
Charade.  It may be no coincidence that Ryder sports a Hepburn look 
here.  Perhaps it's just the lack of chemistry between Ryder and Gere 
that turns everyone against their romance.  "Leave her alone," says 
Stritch.  "She's sick.  She's really sick."  If  she's that close to 
death, what are we saving her from?  At least she'll never have to do 
that tiresome "when I'm fifty he'll be.." math.
     There's nothing really offensive about this retread job except the 
time it wastes.  The director is actress-turned filmmaker Joan Chen, who 
last worked on the Mongolian plains with  Xiu-Xiu, the Sent-Down Girl, 
also about a young girl and an older man.  Chen is 39.  She should be 
old enough to remember Steve Stills, and this plot.

Title
Review for X-Men (2000)
Screenplay by David Hayter, based on the Marvel Comics characters
     It's the not-too-distant future, and mutants (the kind with 
superpowers) are beginning to make their presence felt in our society.  
Society is not pleased - you know how it gets about accepting people who 
are different.  As Senator Kelly (Bruce Davison), the leader of the 
anti-mutant putsch, thunders in Congress, "Would you want them teaching 
your children?"
     The allusion to gay rights is clear, but it's tricky metaphorical 
ground.  Kelly is a McCarthyesque bad guy, but when he rants about the 
dangers these mutants pose, he's onto something - there are good mutants 
and bad mutants, but even the good ones are capable of some pretty 
horrendous destruction.  And as for the bad ones, well, you don't want 
to know. 
     Still, this is rousing, crisply done stuff for a summer action 
blockbuster.  It boasts a top director (Bryan Singer, The Usual 
Suspects), and a fine cast led by intense newcomer Hugh Jackman 
(Wolverine, who seems less a mutant than a victim of fiendish science) 
along with British veterans Patrick Stewart (Dr. Xavier, leader of the 
can't-we-get-along mutants) and Ian McKellan (Magneto, dark prince of 
the disaffected branch, who has good reason to distrust the essential 
decency of humankind.)  The Xs, by the way, include women - they're 
really X-People.  The movie has style, and emphasizes character as well 
as special effects, which makes a nice balance.  Ultimately it turns out 
to have nowhere to go, and halfheartedly mutates into the final credits. 
 But of course it does have someplace to go: a promising future of 
mutant sequels. 

Title
Review for Before Night Falls (2000)
     This is the second feature by the successful painter Julian 
Schnabel (Basquiat).  Both have been biographies of minority artists who 
suffered grievously and died young, both have been visually and 
stylistically bold, both have been self-indulgent, chaotic, and often 
tedious.
     Before Night Falls is based on the autobiography of Reinaldo 
Arenas, the Cuban poet and novelist who was hounded by the Castro 
government for his homosexuality and his writing.  He was surprisingly 
prolific at both.  He boasted of having bedded 5,000 men by the age of 
25 (and after that he was in prison where the opportunities can't have 
slackened much), and despite his years behind bars and the relentless 
censorship he turned out over 20 books before his premature death of 
AIDS in New York at 48. 
     Central to the critical success this picture has enjoyed is the 
Oscar-nominated performance of  Spaniard Javier Bardem (Jamon, Jamon) as 
Arenas.  Bardem does a remarkable job of taking the character from 
exuberant youth to sickly middle age, and he animates him with a cocky, 
jaded innocence.  But as Best Actor material his credentials have as 
much to do with screen time as with interpretation.  The shortfall is to 
a large extent the fault of the movie's structure, which dulls the 
telling with repetitiveness and confusion.
     Some of the confusion comes from the accents.  The movie is spoken 
primarily in a thickly-accented English which is supposed to be Spanish, 
and which is sometimes incomprehensible to the American ear.  Confusing 
matters further are occasional passages spoken in Spanish, the same 
Spanish they're speaking when they're speaking English, if you follow my 
drift.  At least the Spanish Spanish is subtitled, which makes it easier 
to understand. 
     Schnabel begins his tale with the baby Reinaldo, playing 
bare-fannied in the dirt in his little village, as the adult Reinaldo 
fondly recalls in voice-over "a childhood of absolute poverty and 
absolute freedom."  He grows up, discovers his writer's gift and his 
homosexuality, and proceeds to write and fornicate until he's thrown in 
jail on trumped-up charges by the revolutionary regime, whereupon he 
continues to do both anyway.  Eventually he gets out of Cuba when Castro 
empties the country of "undesirables" and ships them to Miami.
     There is an extraordinary cameo by Johnny Depp as a 
manuscript-smuggling transvestite, muddied by another cameo by Johnny 
Depp as a military officer, also well played but confusing -- you wonder 
if it's supposed to be the same guy leading a double life.  Sean Penn 
also contributes a barely recognizable cameo as a gold-toothed wagon 
driver.
     Schnabel and cinematographers Xavier Perez Grobet and Guillermo 
Rosas come up with some stunning visuals, and the film's condemnation of 
the repressiveness of  the Castro revolution is damning and disturbing, 
but the movie churns and spins its wheels in an orgy of stylistic muck, 
and never gets up to the speed the story requires.

Title
Review for Trixie (2000)
     Quick.how funny is this:  "Fish or get off the pot."  Or "Grab the 
bull by the tail and look him in the eye."  Or "Don't just sit there 
like a sore thumb."  Or "Do you think I've got an ace up my hole?"  
Or.or..
     Now imagine them multiplied a thousand-fold.  Imagine a new one 
every time the title character opens her mouth, a mouth filled with gum 
and a painfully off-the-mark Chicago accent.  It's like spending the 
holidays with your wiseacre brother-in-law who thinks he should have 
been a professional comedian.  Worse than that.  It's like spending two 
hours in an Alan Rudolph movie. 
     Emily Watson, an actress with a previously sparkling resume' 
("Breaking the Waves", "Hilary and Jackie") but a shallow track record 
at comedy, is the eponymous Trixie, and the fall girl for Rudolph's 
embarrassing go at what he calls "screwball noir".   She's a security 
guard who gets a job undercover at a casino spotting pickpockets, and 
comes to think of herself as a "private defective".  There she falls for 
Dex (Dermot Mulroney), a two-bit Lothario who works for a scumbag 
building contractor (Will Patton), and gets mixed up in trying to solve 
the murder of a lounge singer (Leslie Anne Warren) who is the mistress 
of a state senator (Nick Nolte). 
     It's hard to tell what Trixie's main interest is - solving crime or 
mangling the language.  Her relentless torrentof malapropisms could only 
be intentional, but she delivers them with a stonefaced determination 
that spreads a leaden pall over any spark that might ignite the story.  
Come to think of it, there is no such spark, and no story.  There are, 
however, a few game performances.  Nolte works hard as the obfuscating 
legislator with a mouthful of political platitudes, though Rudolph's 
determined lack of writing, pacing, and editorial sense leaves him high 
and dry, especially in a long, long restaurant scene that goes nowhere.  
Almost rising above the mess is Nathan Lane as a stand-up comic who does 
nifty impressions in his casino lounge act. 
     Alan Rudolph is a miracle of modern cinema.  Backed by his 
producer/mentor Robert Altman, he has put out a numbing string of movies 
over the years without ever resorting to talent.  It may be time to put 
him together with Keanu Reeves and see what magic they can make 
together.   

Title
Review for Woman on Top (1999)
     Blame it on the Olympics.  No distributor wants to risk opening 
anything good this week, because they figure everyone's home watching 
synchronized swimming and beach volleyball from down under.  NBC, 
meanwhile, is taking a ratings beating.  Where is everybody?  Abducted 
by aliens?
     Fox Searchlight's sacrificial lamb is a relatively inoffensive bit 
of derivative fluff called "Woman On Top", starring Penelope Cruz ("All 
About My Mother") as Isabella, a Brazilian chef with motion sickness.  
She gets nauseous when she's riding or being ridden; for everything from 
cars to sex she has to be in the driver's seat.
     When her husband Toninho (Murilo Benicio) craves the missionary 
position, she catches him in flagrante delictu, and promptly decamps for 
San Francisco.  She bunks in with her old transvestite friend Monica 
(Harold Perrineau Jr.), and solicits the sea goddess (by phone) to cast 
a spell to remove the cheating bastard from her affections.  She lands a 
cooking show on San Francisco TV.  People fall in love with her.  
Toninho comes to Frisco to get her back.  Nobody cares.  Her show goes 
national, but the creeps from network mess with the formula.  
Hum-de-ho-de-hum.
     The story is full of moments that reveal a careless attitude toward 
the material and the audience.  When Isabella walks down the street in 
San Francisco, men follow her like cats after a fish, but only once; the 
rest of the time they pretty much leave her alone.  When Monica 
accompanies her to the beach for an offering to the sea goddess he 
carries a dog, but there's no dog at their apartment.  When Isabella 
runs after Toninho and gets sick because she had to take the elevator, 
she is foiled because he's turning the corner by the time she reaches 
the street.  Everybody speaks English with a Brazilian accent.
     "Woman On Top" is a by-the-numbers attempt at a "Like Water for 
Chocolate" confection of cookery and magic realism that comes out more 
like last year's half-baked Sarah Michelle Gellar culinary vehicle, 
"Simply Irresistible".  The screenplay is a first try by Vera Blasi, who 
was a film student when she wrote it, but director Fina Torres 
("Celestial Clockwork") has no such excuse.  They seem to be under the 
delusion that by calling something magic you make it magical.   The 
movie tries to survive on the wattage of Cruz's considerable appeal, but 
it's just not considerable enough.  It does get some lift from a lively 
and knowing drag performance from Harold Perrineau Jr. (Mercutio in 
"William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet"), and it gets plenty of help from 
Luis Bacalov's wonderful Bossa Nova soundtrack featuring various 
Brazilian artists.  But its charm never rises above the calculated level 
of the gift shop at Disney World.

Title
Review for O Brother, Where Art Thou? (2000)
     People love it or hate it.  The Times gave it a rave.  
Entertainment Weekly gave it an F and labeled it the worst picture of 
the year. 
     Trust me (even though you should never trust anyone who says "trust 
me"): this is a wonderful movie.  The Coen Brothers have made a slyly 
crafted, joyously eclectic picaresque road/buddy movie drawn from 
sources as diverse as Preston Sturges and Homer, The Wizard of Oz, The 
Court Jester, It Happened One Night, Gunga Din, some Leni Riefenstahl, 
some Busby Berkeley, and maybe even a little Jean-Luc Godard.  Does that 
sound crowded?  It's just the tip of the iceberg. 
     "Based," a title card announces, "on The Odyssey by Homer."  This 
odyssey starts with three convicts escaping a chain gang in the 
Depression-era Mississippi Delta, and setting off after buried loot.  
They're Ulysses (George Clooney) and his dim-witted companions Pete 
(John Turturro) and Delmar (Tim Blake Nelson).  Along the way they run 
into a gallery of Homeric rogues -- an old blind seer (Lee Weaver); 
three sirens (Mia Tate, Musetta Vander, Christy Taylor) who lull them, 
rob them, and turn one of them into a frog; a rascally one-eyed Bible 
salesman (John Goodman); Ulysses's wife Penny (Holly Hunter), not quite 
as steadfast and true as her classical counterpart.  Also livening the 
landscape are characters suggesting legendary Delta bluesman Robert 
Johnson (Chris Thomas King); Jimmie Davis, who wrote "You Are My 
Sunshine" and served a couple of terms as Governor of Louisiana (Charles 
Durning); and  a bi-polar Babyface Nelson (Michael Badalucco).
     This is a musical, and the music is terrific.  The centerpiece is 
the recording of "Man of Constant Sorrow" cut by Ulysses and his 
confederates under the moniker "The Soggy Bottom Boys" at a little radio 
station.  The genius of the Coens is to temper their gleeful 
extravagances with the unwinking straightforwardness of the music, which 
swells on the sountrack with studio values even when it's being sung al 
fresco.
     The movie's title comes from the Preston Sturges classic Sullivan's 
Travels; it's the social message film that Hollywood director Sullivan 
(Joel McCrea) wants to make for the common people when he goes out in 
search of the "real" Depression America, only to discover that the 
common people would rather laugh than be reminded of their misery. 
     The Coens understand that.  Laughter surges through this movie like 
water bursting from a dam.  Some of the scenes may seem a bit over the 
top, but they're really more around the bend.  They're held in line by 
disciplined direction and beautifully-tuned acting.  There's almost a 
quality of down-home magic realism to this movie, a blend of cartoon, 
classicism, and social commentary, expertly filmed in yellowish 
nostalgic tones by Roger Deakins.   Some of it makes little sense 
individually, but there's a perfect sense to it overall.   
     The linchpin to the whole project is George Clooney's remarkable 
Ulysses Everett McGill.  This is a risk-taking Clooney you've never 
seen, a pomaded dandy with raffish Gable looks and a silver tongue given 
to locutions like "It's a fool that looks for logic in the chambers of 
the human heart."  If you weren't sure before, the jury is now in: 
George Clooney is a first-rate talent.  So are the Coens.  If there's an 
F here, it's for Fabulous.

Title
Review for Enemy at the Gates (2001)
ENEMY AT THE GATES
Written (with Alain Godard) and Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud
     World War II is back with a vengeance.  On May 25th Pearl Harbor 
will be bombed at a theater near you.  In August, Captain Corelli's 
Mandolin will strike up its tune.  And Santa Fe screens this week 
feature two takes on that war from a Russian perspective.
     Incomparably the better of the two is Elem Klimov's 1985 classic 
Come and See, one of the most harrowing war movies ever made.  Set in 
Byelorussia in 1943, it experiences the horrors of that war through the 
eyes of young Florya (Aleksei Kravchenko) who joins the partisan 
resistance against the Nazi invasion.  The Germans conducted a scorched 
earth campaign in Byelorussia, destroying 638 villages and massacring 
their inhabitants.  "Inferior races carry the microbe of communism," 
sneers a German officer.  "Your nation has no right to exist." 
     What begins as almost a game for Florya, searching on a beach for 
guns with a friend, evolves into horrors so great that the boy suffers a 
trauma-induced progeria, aging decades in a few months.  "I ended up 
filming a lightened-up version of the truth," Klimov has said.  "Had I 
included everything I knew, even I could not have watched it."  There 
are also scenes of lyrical beauty.  A remarkable montage at the end of 
newsreel footage run in reverse suggests that if we could only go back 
far enough maybe we could discover what went wrong and set it right.
     Jean-Jacques Annaud (Seven Years in Tibet) has reconstructed the 
battle of Stalingrad, winnowing it down to a couple of ace snipers (Jude 
Law for the Russians, Ed Harris for the Boche) duking it out as if their 
respective armies had agreed to let the war's outcome be decided by 
their duel.  Law plays Vassili, a sort of stepped-down Sgt. York, a 
country boy with a sharpshooter's eye.  He's built up, sports 
hero-style, by Danilov (Joseph Fiennes), the army political officer who 
writes pamphlets about him. Both of them fall in love with 
fellow-fighter Tanya (Rachel Weisz), and there is never a moment when we 
care about any of this. The production, with its ruined city and 
wall-to-wall dead bodies, is impressive, but Annaud lacks the breadth of 
visual language that made Spielberg's vision of Armageddon so 
devastating.  The characters and the story never engage the imagination. 
 Annaud shows a weakness for the truly bad scene which casts a pall of 
suspicion over his better moments. 

Title
Review for Rajio no jikan (1997)
With Masahiko Nishimura, Toshiaki Karasawa
     Welcome Back Mr. McDonald is flat-out hilarious.  On the surface 
it's a screwball comedy about a live Tokyo radio drama that comes 
unraveled.  On the next level it's about making movies, about show 
business, about the unlimited potential for disaster in a collaborative 
medium which gives sanctuary to Godzilla-sized egos.  And moving along 
to another level, it's about contemporary Japanese society with its 
pressures to Westernize and its pressures to maintain tradition.  You 
can worry about all those levels on your own time, but first, you'll 
just have to sit there and laugh.
     A young housewife (Kyoka Suzuki) has won a contest (she was the 
lone entrant) with her script for an original radio play, a soapy 
romance called "The Woman of Destiny".  The dress rehearsal goes 
smoothly, but shortly before airtime the lead actress (Keiko Toda) 
declares herself uncomfortable with her character's name and demands 
that it be changed.  It seems a fairly harmless bit of temperament.  But 
it's the first stone that starts the avalanche.  I won't even tell you 
what name she settles on, or try to walk you through the frenetic plot 
developments that careen with the speed and unpredictability of 
electrons zipping off the walls of an atom.  But once the harried 
producer (Masahiko Nishimura) has opened the door by agreeing to the 
name change, there's no kicking it shut again.  Each change requires 
another, in geometric progression, until chaos reigns during the live 
broadcast.
     This is one of the most delicious showbiz send-ups since Soapdish 
and Broadcast News.  It may not have the character development of those 
classics, but it's got the freshness and the madcap pace, and it shines 
with both derision and affection for the medium it lampoons.  It's a 
first film by writer-director Koki Mitani, who was the founder of an 
alternative theater company called The Tokyo Sunshine Boys.  He adapted 
his own stage farce to the screen, and although the action is largely 
confined to the innards of a radio studio, it never feels constricted. 
     Screwball comedy has pretty much gone the way of the running board 
and the vinyl record.  The modern substitute is gross-out humor, a form 
that puts a low premium on wit and a high value on bodily sounds and 
fluids.  Welcome Back, Mr. McDonald harkens back to a comedy style that 
provoked a wonderfully satisfying laughter.  Welcome back, indeed.

Title
Review for Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001)
     There are plenty of horse laughs in Eddie Murphy's return 
engagement as John Dolittle, doctor and animal counselor.  There is also 
an environmentally-friendly plot about deforestation and endangered 
species.  Murphy himself is smooth and likeable as the zoophonic 
physician, and the animals are cute and move their lips when they talk.  
In the dog days of summer, it's hard to ask a great deal more of a 
popular comedy. 
It certainly seems to be too much to ask for a moratorium on 
scatological humor, although Murphy, writer Larry Levin, and director 
Steve Carr show a modicum of  restraint, holding off on the heavy stuff 
for the first hour or so.  But their self-discipline only lasts so long 
before giving in to the toilet humor that has become indispensable to 
modern lowbrow comedy.  Here, at least, one of the gags does come to 
grips with the classic question of whether a bear exercises a certain 
bodily function in the woods; the answer is: not always. 
As the picture begins, Dolittle is minding his own business, giving 
a positive-image mantra to a stray dog support group ("I am somebody's 
best friend") and dealing with his Father-Knows-Best family life when he 
is summoned by a tough-talking wiseguy raccoon (voice of Michael 
Rapaport) to a meeting with the Godbeaver (Richard C. Sarafian).  The 
beaver alerts the doctor to the rapacious activities of a logging 
company bent on clear-cutting a local forest.  There are many bits of 
information one might need animal language skills to uncover, but this 
wouldn't seem to be among them - surely environmental activists would 
have already pushed this item to the front page.  But logic is not the 
bottom line in this movie. 
Dolittle agrees to take the case (how could he refuse), and with 
his lawyer wife (Kristin Wilson) he gets a court injunction to stop the 
logging on the grounds of irreparable harm to an endangered species - 
the Pacific Western Bear.  But there is only one such bear in this 
stretch of woods - a female (voiced by Lisa Kudrow).  To qualify as a 
savable species a mate will have to be found for her, and Dolittle 
locates one in a circus sideshow - a tap-dancing ham of a bear named 
Archie (Steve Zahn).  Trouble is, Archie has no talent or taste for the 
rustic life.  It's up to Dolittle to persuade him to take the gig, and 
then teach him how to survive in the wild and win the bear lady.
Levin's script relies on clever one-liners, not on story or 
consistency.  There's no follow-through on the animal mafia premise, for 
instance, and a subplot involving the emerging sexuality and 
independence of Dolittle's sixteen-year-old daughter (Raven-Symone) goes 
nowhere: a promised trip to Europe and a promising boyfriend (Lil' Zane) 
are dropped unceremoniously from the screen.  But you won't really care 
about that sappy subplot, anyway.  What makes DD2 worth while are the 
jokes, and if you like talking animals with a sense of humor (and who 
doesn't?), you'll have a good time.  Eddie Murphy has the charisma and 
comic talent to hold it all together, although for the most part his 
character here is so tamed that he seems to have moved from Mr. 
Robinson's neighborhood into Mr. Rogers's.

Title
Review for Dakhtaran-e Khorshid (2000)
DAUGHTERS OF THE SUN (Dokhtaran-e-Khorshid)
Written and Directed by Maryam Shahriar
     The sun never shines on the "daughters of the sun."  In Maryam 
Shahriar's ironically-titled debut masterpiece, the girls spend most of 
their time in a dark adobe room, slaving at looms under the saturnine 
supervision of their brutal boss, creating the hand-woven Persian 
carpets that may someday wind up commanding enormous sums of money in 
Western showrooms.  Even outdoors, the sun never penetrates the heavy 
atmosphere of rural Iran.  Homayun Payvar's extraordinary camerawork (he 
shot Kiarostami's A Taste of Cherry) bathes everything in an exquisite 
melancholy of mist and shadow.  Daughters of the Sun is one of the most 
beautifully photographed films you will ever see. 
     Not all the daughters of the sun look like daughters.  At the 
film's opening, Amangol (Altinay Ghelich Taghani) has her hair cut off, 
the camera focusing on the ground as the long dark tresses drop and 
scatter in the wind.   She dresses as a boy and leaves home to work as 
an apprentice to the carpet master.  The disguise is required because 
only men can be master weavers; the girls are relegated to subordinate 
work. 
     Her male disguise is intermittently effective; some see through it, 
others do not. Perhaps the boss sees through it, but it suits his 
purposes not to - Amangol is a brilliant weaver.  The dark-eyed musician 
who urges Amangol to run away with him appears to have guessed her 
secret, but the young weaver Belghies (Sogrha Karimi) who falls in love 
with her and begs Amangol to ask for her hand has not (though you have 
the feeling that if she were to reveal her hidden gender, Belghies would 
say, like Joe E. Brown in Some Like It Hot, "Well, nobody's perfect.")  
There are times when it seems that even Amangol herself loses track of 
who and what she really is.
     Shahriar's storytelling is contained and minute, like the detail in 
the delicate carpets woven in the dusty adobe sweatshop.  The setting is 
a small area of remote countryside; Amangol's journey from home is less 
than a day's walk, yet returning home, even when she learns that her 
mother is sick, is out of the question.  An outsider, an official with 
the Iranian Social Security department, spends much of the movie 
searching for the tiny village, though from various clues we know he 
must be within a few miles of it all the while.  Most of the time there 
is nothing to suggest even a particular century, other than the 
official's jeep and the anomaly of streetlights along the country road.
     One of the girls in the shop gets married, to her cousin.  "Do you 
love him?" Belghies asks.  "I don't know," the girl replies.  They've 
been engaged since birth.  When the bridal couple arrives at their 
house, the young groom hesitantly lifts the bride's veil, and a hint of 
a shy smile crosses his face; and you have the feeling this may be the 
last moment of tenderness she will know in her life. 
     The subject matter is melancholy, but Shahriar closes in a spirit 
of fiery affirmation.  Despite its themes of enslavement, exploitation, 
and perfidy,  Daughters of the Sun is not depressing.  A movie this 
beautiful and this engrossing can only leave the viewer exhilarated.

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
Screenplay by Craig Ferguson & Mark Crowdy
With Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson
     There's an inexhaustible mine of humor to be found in the oddball 
characters of small-town Britain when the material is handled right, and 
director Nigel Cole does just that with this virtuously naughty tale of 
good folks and contraband horticulture.
     Grace Trevathan (Brenda Blethyn of Little Voice and Secrets & Lies) 
has no more than buried her husband when she finds out the bastard 
checked out with a mountain of debt that is now hers.  Pretty soon 
they're carting out the furniture, and she's about to lose the grand 
house in Cornwall where until now she's lived without a care in the 
world, tending her prize-winning garden.
     A way out turns up in the form of a sickly marijuana plant.  Her 
gardener (Craig Ferguson of TV's The Drew Carey Show, who co-wrote and 
coproduced) asks her advice on restoring his ailing cash crop to health. 
 Pretty soon they've got a greenhouse full of the stuff, grown 
hydroponically and thriving (the filmmakers got government sanction to 
use real marijuana, but no plants were harmed in the making of this 
movie.)  The next step is to get a dealer, and Grace travels to London 
to find one.  Protected by her impenetrable combination of pluckiness 
and naivete, not to mention a stunning white leisure suit, she beards 
the den of the enjoyably sleazy Jacques (Tcheky Karyo of Patriot), wins 
him over, and..
     To make a long story short, she lives happily ever after.  Of 
course, certain concessions to popular morality have to be made, but 
that's no problem for these folks.  Blethyn is a wonderful actress who 
hits every note with perfect pitch, Ferguson adds an appealing Scots 
scruffiness, and the supporting cast is filled with crafty pros who know 
just how to take this well-worn material and make you grin at it all 
over again.  Beautifully photographed Cornwall adds to the enjoyment.
     Saving Grace is in the tradition of movies like The Full Monty  and 
Saving Ned Devine, and the old Ealing Studio classics like Tight Little 
Island, and while it doesn't take that tradition to any new levels, it 
doesn't let it down.

Title
Review for A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)
     The first warning signal flashes on the screen with the opening 
credit: "an Amblin/Stanley Kubrick production."  Amblin, of course, 
means Steven Spielberg, and the promise of this collaboration is about 
as reassuring as a duet between Perry Como and Yoko Ono. 
Spielberg is about sentiment, Kubrick was about detachment.  When 
you combine those two approaches, what do you get?  A robot with 
emotions.  A machine ingeniously constructed and programmed to simulate 
the responses associated with human feelings.  You get David (Haley Joel 
Osment), a mechanical device with the look of an eleven-year-old boy and 
a capacity to love and yearn for love in return.
This project, based on a Brian Aldiss short story called "Supertoys 
Last All Summer Long", lay on Kubrick's drawing board for years, and he 
had conferred at length with Spielberg about it.  After Kubrick's sudden 
death in 1999, his friend picked up the baton.  His desire to create an 
homage to Kubrick is understandable, but the movie that came out of it 
is often labored, schizophrenic, self-indulgent, derivative, hackneyed, 
and long. 
The story begins against rolling ocean and a Ben Kingsley 
voice-over informing us that this is the time after global warming has 
melted the polar caps and submerged much of the world.  Livable land is 
now at a premium, most of the world's poorer population has been 
drowned, there is strict governmental control over reproduction, and 
robots have taken over the menial work.  The scene shifts to the lab of 
Dr. Hobby (William Hurt), who explains the history of robots to his 
colleagues in a painfully expository lecture.  When he broaches his plan 
to build a mecha (mechanical device) that can love, he's interrupted for 
a Meaningful Question: "If we create a mecha that can love, can we get 
humans to love it in return?"
This is the central issue of A.I., and it's a straw man.  Humans 
can love anything, animate or inanimate.  We love our cars, we love 
stuffed animals, we love all sorts of things that have neither a heart, 
nor a brain, nor courage.  Stripped down, A.I.'s premise amounts to 
this: love is the most essential of emotions, it is mechanically 
reproducible, and the computerized version is purer and more dependable 
than the human kind.
After a number of years (leapt, thankfully, at a single bound) 
Hobby creates his prototype loving mecha, and it is brought home 
unannounced by Henry Swinton (Sam Robards) to his wife Monica (Frances 
O'Connor) as a replacement for their son Martin (Jake Thomas), who lies 
frozen in a very Kubrick-like cryogenics chamber with an incurable 
disease for which a cure will probably never (hah!) be found. 
Spielberg's screenplay dresses story in logic with the grace of an 
ugly stepsister's foot being crammed into a glass slipper.  For reasons 
passing understanding David is accepted in the Swinton home, programmed 
to love Monica (but not Henry), and provided with a best friend, the 
comatose Martin's Supertoy Teddy bear (voiced by Jack Angel) who 
presumably comes from the shelves of some futuristic Toys R Us but is 
smarter than the cutting-edge David, and wiser indeed than anybody else 
in the movie.
In a cool Kubrickian land of banked emotions, Teddy is pure essence 
of Spielberg, with his rolling gait and his gruff voice and his cuddly 
fur.  And when malevolent circumstances conspire to get David thrown out 
of paradise (if the chilly Swinton household can be so described), Teddy 
goes with him, a steadfast Jiminy Cricket to his lost Pinocchio, 
comforting and guiding him in his quest to find the Blue Fairy and be 
turned into a real live boy so he can go back home to Mommy and bask in 
her love. 
The most interesting character in the movie is Jude Law as Gigolo 
Joe, a robotic sex toy who befriends David and accompanies him on his 
search for the Blue Fairy.  "She will make you a real boy," he promises 
leeringly, "for I will make her a real woman!"  But the performance the 
movie depends on is Osment's; and while there's no denying this kid's 
acting talent, we've seen his trademark scrunched-up face and manic 
intensity before and it's beginning to suffer from exposure and 
advancing age.
A.I.'s 2 hour saga winds through three acts: home, the quest, 
and a resolution two millennia in the future.  Along the way it dazzles 
us with special effects and technical accomplishments, but they perform 
their wonders in the service of a story that is so full of shallow 
trickery, and so cluttered with elements hijacked wantonly from other 
movies ranging from The Wizard of Oz to Planet of the Apes with side 
trips through most of the Kubrick and Spielberg canons, that it abuses 
our patience and betrays the promise of true intelligence that made it 
the most anticipated movie of the summer.

Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
     Like its heroine Viane (Juliette Binoche), a drifter who pulls up 
roots and relocates more often than Hillary Clinton, Lasse Hallstrom's 
Chocolat is a hard movie to pin down.  There's an undeniable sweetness 
to this fable of the redemptive power of pleasure, but there's a 
troubling lack of inspiration as well.  It aspires to the territory of 
the great food movies like Babette's Feast, Like Water for Chocolate, 
and Eat, Drink, Man, Woman, but it lands somewhere closer to the 
packaged entree blandness of this year's Woman on Top.  
     We are introduced to an enchanting little French river village and 
informed by a voice over that "if you lived in this village, you knew 
your place in the scheme of things, and if you forgot, someone reminded 
you."  As likely as not, that someone would be the Comte de Reynaud 
(Alfred Molina), the town's petty nobleman, mayor, and moral policeman.  
     But one day a bizarre north wind kicks up, and on its blustery 
gusts two red-hooded figures blow into town.  They are Viane and her 
little daughter Anouk (Victoire Thivisol, remembered from Ponette), and 
they immediately rent an empty patisserie which Viane sets about turning 
into a chocolaterie.  As luck and timing would have it, the opening of 
the house of confection coincides with the beginning of Lent.  This, 
combined with the newcomer's refusal to attend the village church, where 
Reynaud monitors and takes attendance, quickly chills the locals' 
welcome. 
     The theme of Chocolat, which is adapted from a popular novel by 
Joanne Harris, is that goodness is not measured by self-denial, but by 
openness and charitable love.  The Catholic Church takes a good measure 
of the flat end of the stick here as the instrument of repression.  To 
be sure, the young priest (Hugh O'Conor of  The Young Poisoner's 
Handbook) is a tender-hearted, rock 'n' roll-loving softie, but he is 
putty in the hands of the overbearing Count, and the church he serves 
does enforce Lent, and Viane's refusal to attend it has nothing to do 
with the Count's authoritarianism. 
     Bit by bit, or bite by bite, the populace succumbs to the 
temptations of Viane's chocolate delicacies, and of her understanding 
nature.  Long-dormant sexual passions are reawakened, flinty old grumps 
are softened, timid lovers are emboldened, the oppressed cease from 
distressing and take control of their own lives.  And there is a 
wonderful caliber of actors to do all this.  Dame Judi Dench, Lena Olin, 
John Wood, Leslie Caron, Peter Stormare, and Carrie-Ann Moss all bring 
their great talents to the telling of this fable.
     But there are no surprises.  Nobody does anything you couldn't 
predict from the first moment he or she is introduced.  This creates the 
problem of a flatness of character.  There is a certain charm, for 
instance, to the geriatric romance between the shy John Wood and the 
widow Leslie Caron still mourning her husband forty years after his 
death in WWI, but there is no real humanity to it.
     The case can be made that this is a fairy tale, after all, and 
fairy tales live on a menu of atmosphere and satisfaction, not surprise. 
 Viane and her daughter arrive cloaked like mother-daughter Little Red 
Riding Hoods, wafted on a wind of magical realism, and they set about 
concocting a magic potion to awaken the villagers trapped in a cheerless 
spell.  For some viewers that potion will work, that spell will be 
broken.  Others will be unconvinced.
     If it has taken a long time in this review to get to Johnny Depp, 
well, it takes a long time in the movie too.  He turns up midway through 
as a "river rat", an Irish gypsy who drifts from town to town with the 
river's current.  He's a welcome addition, but truth to tell, he never 
gets much to do other than fix a door, play a guitar, provide a kindred 
outcast spirit to go with Viane's, and look meltingly handsome.  Still, 
there aren't many actors who can put what he does into a line like "I'll 
come around some time and get that squeak out of your door."
     Juliette Binoche never gets comfortable in her role.  Lena Olin 
does better as an abused wife who finds sanctuary in the chocolate shop. 
 The performance that makes the biggest impact belongs to Alfred Molina, 
who takes the role of ogre and seeds it with flakes of humanity that 
promise an ultimate redemption.
     Chocolat keeps veering between fulfillment and disappointment.  
There are wonderful scenes, adorable characters, funny bits, moments of 
real magic and magic realism.  But it never quite finds itself, and the 
blame has to fall to director Hallstrom, just as much of the credit for 
last year's The Cider House Rules belongs to him.  He can't quite figure 
it out.  There is a favorite bedtime story that little Anouk pries from 
her reluctant mother, about her grandmE8re and grandp=E8re.  As Viane =
tells the story we go to a flashback of their romance that includes an 
unaccountable sex scene.  As sex scenes go these days, it's pretty 
modest, but there's no reason for it in this movie.  It's an indication 
of Hallstrom's lack of mastery of this material.
     Don't misunderstand - there is an audience for this movie, some 
people will love it, and even the grinchiest critic can hardly hate it.  
But the magic wand Lasse Hallstrom tries to wave in this broad-stroked 
fairy tale sometimes feels more like a cattle prod.

Title
Review for Fuori dal mondo (1999)
     Giuseppe Piccione's Not of This World has won bucketfuls of  awards 
from the Italian academy and a number of international film festivals, 
and has the luck of the draw to be a nominee for Oscar's Best Foreign 
Language Film in the year that Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon is 
dominating the mix.  Still, as they say, it's honor enough to be 
nominated in such exalted company.
     Piccione has created what amounts to a high-end soap opera, but the 
emphasis is on high end.  A nun, Sister Caterina (Margherita Buy), has a 
foundling baby thrust into her arms on a walk through the park in Milan. 
 She takes him to the hospital, but she can't let it go at that.  She 
undertakes a bit of detective work to track down the baby's mother.
     Ernesto (Silvio Orlando) owns a dry cleaning establishment.  He 
doesn't much like his work, but he does it obsessively, to the exclusion 
of having a life.  On a night about nine months earlier he apparently 
had sex with a girl who was briefly an employee.  The girl turns out to 
be the mother of the abandoned baby, and Ernesto might be the father.  
The three lives, and particularly Ernesto's and Caterina's, come 
together.
     What is unusually appealing in this movie is its examination of 
choice and change.  Caterina is eleven months away from her final vows.  
She is sure of her calling, and  is a beacon and a rock of reassurance 
for the younger novices.  But the baby awakens something in her.  She 
becomes vulnerable to the lure of the possibilities offered by life 
outside the cloister, and to the taunts and questions of people who 
consider the veil a barricade behind which to hide from the dangers of 
the real world. 
     Ernesto is a closed, life-rejecting nebbish.  He takes dry cleaning 
seriously, but he can never remember the names of the young women who 
work for him.  For him, dry cleaning is an end in itself; he can't quite 
fathom these people who flit through it en route to more fulfilling 
lives.  He turns down invitations from friends, and advances from women. 
 He goes home at night and eats a solitary meal and reads a magazine.  
The most difficult thing to believe in this story is that he would have 
had a tumble with the pretty teenager who turns out to be the baby's 
mother.
     The baby - this inconvenient eruption of life - is the catalyst 
that brings together  Caterina and Ernesto and works change in their 
lives, and it is one of this movie's considerable satisfactions to watch 
these two superb actors express those changes.  The directions they take 
are not always predictable, but they make sense.  Neither are quite "of 
this world", one cloistered behind the veil, the other behind a loner's 
defenses, but life reaches in and prods them.
     The camerawork by Luca Bigazzi beautifully sets off Piccioni's 
intelligent screenplay and direction.  Ludovico Einaudi's score 
sometimes overwhelms the action - there is a subplot involving a 
false-alarm heart attack suffered by Ernesto as a result of stress, 
during which he complains that he can't breathe, and the music sometimes 
threatens to bring on a similar condition in the audience. 

Title
Review for Croupier (1998)
"I've a system that's fiendishly clever
"That I learned from a croupier friend;
"And I should go on winning forever,
"But I do seem to lose in the end."
     Gambling is a loser's game.  As seen through the cool, 
odds-calculating eyes of Jack (Clive Owen), a professional croupier and 
aspiring novelist, the punters who sit at the blackjack and roulette 
tables are sheep headed, sooner or later, for the shears.   
     Jack himself doesn't gamble.  At least, not on cards or the spin of 
a wheel.  But he's not immune to a little risk-taking in life.  After 
all, he's a writer, and if a writer doesn't throw open the doors to 
chance and a little danger, there's not much to write about.  Risks are 
the chips a writer buys to get in the game.  The odds, of course, are as 
bad for a writer as for a gambler, as Jack observes, browsing in a 
bookstore where "books are piled like chips."
     The movie opens with Jack being courted by an editor to write a 
novel, and it unfolds, with voice-over narration, in third-person 
chapter form once Jack reluctantly follows his father's urging and takes 
a job as a croupier in one of London's private gambling casinos.  The 
book he undertakes is not the soccer novel he's discussed with the 
editor, but a dispassionate insider's take on the casino world.  It's a 
world of strict rules routinely broken, of odds and chances, of personal 
loyalties and skin-saving expediency.  And what is actually happening to 
Jack, and what is happening to his novel's protagonist Jake, is not 
always easy to distinguish.
     Clive Owen, the 35-year-old actor who plays Jack, opens the door 
into star territory in his first role to successfully weather the 
Atlantic crossing.  He has the chiseled intense elegance of a young Sean 
Connery.  Tuxedoed, unflappable, with piercing eyes that miss nothing, 
he occupies "the still center of that spinning wheel of misfortune."  
Placing him there are another couple of veteran filmmakers.  Paul 
Mayersberg (The Man Who Fell to Earth) builds his screenplay through 
character and detail before throwing in an unexpected twist at the end.  
Director Mike Hodges, whose first and best-know feature, the crime 
classic Get Carter (with Michael Caine), came out thirty years ago, 
directs with the sang-froid of a player counting cards. 
     Croupier is that refreshing anomaly, the sleeper hit that keeps the 
system honest.  In the wild gamble that is the movies, it's reassuring 
to see that, if you play your cards right, it's not impossible to beat 
the odds.  

Title
Review for Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien (2000)
     A chance meeting during a trip brings together two men, a 
gregarious extrovert and a cautious introvert, in a bizarre relationship 
that could have deadly repercussions.  It's the armature for Alfred 
Hitchcock's classic Strangers on a Train, and here it's taken up by 
German-French writer-director Dominik Moll, and given a fascinating and 
wholly original treatment with a vaguely paranormal twist.
Michel (Laurent Lucas) is a man caught in the web of middle-class 
struggle.  He has a wife (Mathilde Seigner) and three little girls, a 
job with a modest income, a tumbledown fixer-upper of a vacation home, 
and meddlesome elderly parents.  En route to his country house, with the 
car sweltering and the kids whining, he runs into an old school friend 
(Sergi Lopez) in the bathroom of a highway rest stop. 
Or at least the guys says he's an old friend.  "Harry - class of 
'79," he says, thrusting out a glad hand.  Michel shrugs helplessly.  
"I'm sorry.." 
But Harry is not offended, and soon with his sloe-eyed and ripely 
sensuous fiancE9e Plum (Sophie Guillemin) he has insinuated himself as =
a houseguest into Michel's life.  At dinner he regales his bemused hosts 
with a reverential recitation of a poem Michel published in their high 
school magazine 20 years earlier.  "Are you still writing?" Harry asks.  
Michel shakes his head.  He no longer has time for that sort of thing...
Who the devil is this Harry?  He's wealthy beyond the point of 
caring, he's free as a bird, he has an adoring girlfriend who, he 
explains, isn't the brightest bulb in the lamp but has "an animal 
intelligence" and is a perfect bedmate.  And he only wants to help (the 
French title translates more closely as "Harry, A Friend Who Wishes You 
Well.")  Money is no object.  Nor, it gradually appears, is morality. 
"His motto is 'For every problem there's a solution,'" Plum tells 
Michel and his wife.  They might not be the solutions you or I, or 
Michel, would fix upon, but they have a certain pragmatic directness.  
He seems to have a residual hero-worship of Michel from their high 
school days, when he dated Michel's leftover girlfriend and memorized 
everything he wrote.  That Michel was a sort of ideal for him; and now, 
when he sees cares and responsibilities weighing his old friend down and 
keeping him from pursuing his youthful talents, it makes Harry mad.
With a Friend Like Harry is a gem of a psychological thriller, with 
a terrific cast.  Lopez won France's Best Actor Cesar for his creepily 
ingratiating Harry.  Moll's story, with its humor and its ominous 
suspense (an empty well in the back yard just begs for a body) never 
lets up.
But the greatest fun of the movie is trying to figure out Harry.  
Who is he?  Is he a real person at all?  Is he the dark side of Michel's 
nature?  Is he Satan (one of whose traditional nicknames is Harry)?  Is 
he just a well-meaning psychopath?  We can't make him out - that's the 
trouble with Harry..
But then that's a different Hitchcock movie.

Title
Review for Life and Times of Hank Greenberg, The (1998)
Written and Directed by Aviva Kempner
     You don't have to be a baseball fan to love Aviva Kempner's 
documentary about legendary Detroit Tiger slugger Hank Greenberg, though 
it probably helps.
     Greenberg wasn't the first Jewish player to reach the majors, but 
he was the first to achieve stardom without downplaying his religion, 
and it made him the idol of American Jews in the decade when Hitler was 
stoking his cauldron of hate in Germany, and anti-Semitism was 
conspicuously alive and well in this country too.  Greenberg played in 
Detroit, home of such major league bigots as Henry Ford and the infamous 
Father Coughlin.  He filled the star void left by the departure of 
all-time Tiger great and world-class sonofabitch Ty Cobb.
     Greenberg was 6'4", with muscles like Paul Bunyan, and he muted the 
jeers of "kike" and "sheeny" with an awesome barrage of homers and RBIs. 
 His average never fell below .300 till his last year with the Tigers, 
after he'd returned from four years in WWII.  He was twice the American 
League's most valuable player, and that didn't include the year ('37) 
when he drove in 183 runs, one shy of Gehrig's record, or the year ('38) 
when he electrified baseball with his 58 homers, two short of the 
immortal Bambino's mark.  He was baseball's first $100,000 man. 
    "He may have been the single most important Jew to live in the 
1930s," says Alan Dershowitz.  "I thought he'd be the first Jewish 
president." 
     Greenberg wasn't an observant Jew, but he was a proud one.  In his 
second year with the Tigers he agonized over whether to play on Rosh 
Hashanah.  A Detroit rabbi sent him a Talmudic passage that okayed it, 
and Hankus Spankus walloped two homers to win a 2-0 game (the rabbi, a 
baseball fan, later admitted he'd fudged his interpretation.) When he 
declined to play on Yom Kippur, the poet Edgar Guest saluted him in the 
Detroit paper:
"We shall miss him in the infield, we shall miss him at the bat,
"He is true to his religion, and I honor him for that."
     Aviva Kempner's labor of love took her 14 years, beginning with 
interviews with the great man shortly before his death in '86.  She 
talked to teammates, opponents, sportswriters, and fans, and dug out 
vintage baseball film and Mandy Patinkin's Yiddish "Take Me Out to the 
Ballgame" for the soundtrack.  She clutters things a bit with extraneous 
footage from Hollywood baseball movies, and sometimes her narrative 
drive slumps.  It's not great filmmaking, but it's an impassioned 
treatment of a great subject.
     Poetically, Hank Greenberg ended his career with the Pirates in 
'47, bringing him to the National League the year Jackie Robinson broke 
in.  "I didn't know what having it bad was till I saw what happened to 
Robinson," he said.

Title
Review for Zamani barayé masti asbha (2000)
     Bahman Ghobadi's stunning debut film strips away the protective 
layer that separates an audience from the world that unfolds on the 
screen.  We're transported almost bodily into the hardscrabble landscape 
of a Kurdish mountain village near Iran's border with Iraq.
This is a story of deprivation, a story of survival, but most of 
all it's a love story.  It focuses on three children: Ayoub, his sister 
Ameneh, and their older brother Madi, who is a crippled dwarf.  Their 
mother is dead, their father is a smuggler, and when he is killed the 
kids are pretty much on their own.  Madi, with his doll-sized body and 
hunched back and eyes both childlike and inexpressibly old, needs 
regular injections and will require an operation to stay alive.
The two healthy children do what they can for Madi.  The teenage 
Ameneh agrees to a marriage for a promise of help from the bridegroom's 
family.  12-year-old Ayoub shoulders a man's burden as a smuggler, 
hauling contraband over harsh snowy mountains through cold so bitter the 
pack mules are fed booze to keep them warm.  The operation will buy Madi 
at most another year of life, but they never stop to weigh the cost.  At 
that age, and through those uncompromisingly loving eyes, a year seems 
like a lot, and the alternative is unimaginable.
Ghobadi, who won the Camera d'Or at Cannes for best first film, 
tells his story from his heart and experience.  He's from a Kurdish 
village much like this one.  Ghobadi's style is simple and direct, and 
images such as little Madi riding like a solemn-eyed puppy in a mule's 
saddlebag are pictures you'll carry with you a long time. 

Title
Review for Angel Eyes (2001)
     It may be a sign of a beginning thaw, or perhaps just of audience 
desperation, but this year's bad movies are beginning to seem a little 
less bad.  Angel Eyes, the Jennifer Lopez action-romance with a 
supernatural tease, is bearable and sometimes even engaging.  It should 
never be confused with a good movie, but it will do to pass the time.
     It comes from director Luis Mandoki, whose When a Man Loves a Woman 
and Message in a Bottle  will give you some idea of what to expect - 
soapy sentiment yoked to professional competence.  This idea was 
probably born following a screening of The Sixth Sense, or rather after 
the box office returns began to show the sleeper potential of that 
movie's supernatural appeal. 
     Angel Eyes picks up where the Shyamalan movie left off.  There, we 
weren't supposed to even think about the fact that Bruce Willis might be 
dead until the surprise ending.  Here, we're supposed to think about 
little else.  Is he dead or isn't he?  Catch (James Caviezel) strides 
the seedy neighborhoods of Chicago in his long flapping overcoat 
(wings?) doing good deeds which go largely unappreciated.  But we've 
seen him before - in the movie's prologue, when Officer Sharon Pogue 
(Jennifer Lopez) tries to save his life at the scene of a terrible auto 
accident.  Does she or doesn't she?  Only the filmmakers know for sure..
     When they meet again, neither of them seem to recall the incident.  
He feels a bond with her, but doesn't appear to know why.  His face 
rings no bells with her.
     Here's what we know about Sharon: she comes from a family where the 
men sometimes beat up their wives.  She once called the cops on her 
father (Victor Argo) when he was beating up her mother (Sonia Braga), 
and he hasn't spoken to her since.  Now she's a cop herself, and as 
tough as they come.  She drinks and swaps friendly macho barbs with the 
guys.  But she has intimacy issues.
     Here's what we know about Catch:  damn little.  He's a bit on the 
weird, silent side, but Caviezel is too good an actor to leave himself 
completely mired in that tedious movie clichE9, and he leavens his =
performance with unexpected smiles and flashes of humor.  He has a 
kitchen drawer full of action figures, and it's hard to miss the 
correlation with Sharon, a feisty little action figure herself if there 
ever was one.  He leaves doors open.  And he has intimacy issues.      
     To a large extent your enjoyment level will depend on how well you 
connect with its two stars, and how well you feel they connect to each 
other.  There are bits of cinematic carelessness: Sharon takes a bullet 
smack in the bulletproof vest, which leaves a deep and angry bruise 
above her breast; but the next time she exposes that area of flesh, and 
it doesn't take long, it's creamy enough to reveal at the Oscars.  There 
are also bits of pure pleasure: Catch picks up a trumpet on the 
bandstand at a blues club and plays a nicely haunting rendition of 
"Nature Boy".  And of course there are many bits of nonsense: long 
silences as people stare uncomfortably at each other, a disease that 
seems to be caused by cameras and lights.
     This isn't a gotta-see-it movie, it's more of a 
what's-at-the-movies movie.  As the old blues line has it, it can be 
your little dog till your big dog comes.

Title
Review for Blow Dry (2001)
With Alan Rickman, Natasha Richardson
     The most intriguing thing about this uneven, formulaic British 
comedy is the writing credit:  Based on the Screenplay "Never Better" by 
Simon Beaufoy.  What does this mean?  Beaufoy is the screenwriter 
responsible for The Full Monty, and Blow Dry looks like an early, 
groping draft, with a hairdressing competition substituted for male 
strip-tease. 
     If Beaufoy tried to distance himself from this one, it's 
understandable.  The screenplay is manipulative, predictable, and 
uninspired.  What gives it a brush of charm is the talents of its cast.  
Alan Rickman is Phil, a gloomy, embittered barber in the provincial 
Yorkshire town of Keighley.  He has some reason for his bitterness: his 
wife Shelly (Natasha Richardson) left him some ten years earlier to run 
off with another woman, their friend and model Sandra (Rachel 
Griffiths).  They didn't run very far - Sandra and Shelley have a 
hairdressing salon just down the street.  This is awkward for all 
concerned, especially Phil and Shelly's son Brian (Josh Hartnett), who 
works for his Dad and is painfully embarrassed by his lesbian Mom.
     This cozy little world is shaken up by two momentous revelations.  
Shelly has terminal cancer.  And the National British Hairdessing 
Championships are coming to Keighley.  The movie makes very little 
distinction between the emotional importance of these facts, but in plot 
terms the edge goes to the hairdressing competition. 
     Phil and Shelly are former champion hairstylists, and Shelly, dying 
as she is, sees the championships as a chance to get the family back on 
speaking terms before she goes to the Great Salon in the Sky.  Phil of 
course will have nothing to do with it, but we don't put any stock in 
that - the question is not if, but when and why, he will come around, 
take up curling iron and blow dryer, and win the event. 
     The plot bears no more discussion.  What makes this an 
entertainment worth something close to the price of admission in this 
slow cinematic season is the cast, or at least most of it.  Rickman, 
always a moody cuss, uses his appealing Bassett hound world-weariness to 
great effect; when he allows a smile to crack the dour crust it's like 
sunshine breaking through a gloomy sky.  Richardson uses all her 
considerable charm and skill to make us forget as much as possible the 
dreary plot device she's been saddled with.  Griffiths is good, despite 
an embarrassing scene in which she does a Japanese impression.  Bill 
Nighy (the lead singer in Still Crazy) adds a deliciously conniving 
character as Phil's unscrupulous hairdressing rival, and Warren Clarke 
is funny as the town's showbiz-happy mayor.  And any movie that has 
Rosemary Harris, even in a badly underwritten character, has some claim 
on our affections.  The young folks, imported from Hollywood for teen 
appeal, are a split decision: Hartnett does okay, mastering the 
Yorkshire dialect effectively, but the ingE9nue Rachel Leigh Cook is a =
washout.  Beaufoy's script should have been left in its drawer, and this 
cast used for something better suited to its talents

Title
Review for Song jia huang chao (1997)
"Once upon a time in China there were three sisters. One loved money, 
one loved power, and the third loved her country."
     With this legend, over black-and-white footage of three little 
girls on swings, begins the historical drama of one of modern China's 
most fascinating families, in an epic film directed by Mabel Cheung from 
a screenplay by her partner Alex Law.  The quote lays out several things 
for us - the locus of the movie's heart, the tone of its telling, and 
the source of some of its problems.
    The Soong sisters were the daughters of Charlie Soong (Jiang Wen), 
an American-educated Chinese missionary end entrepreneur.  All three 
were sent to the States to college.  The eldest, Ai-ling (Michelle 
Yeoh), married a wealthy Chinese financier (Niu Zhen-Hua); the middle 
sister, Ching-ling (Maggie Cheung), married her father's friend Dr. Sun 
Yat-Sen (Winston Chao), the revolutionary "Father of Modern China"; the 
youngest, May-ling (Vivian Wu) married Sun's protE9g=E9 and successor, =
Chiang Kai-Shek (Wu Hsing Kuo).
      The size and sweep of this movie is impressive, and its historical 
lessons, though they may be simplistic, impart information about an 
extraordinary 20th century family of which most of us are sadly 
ignorant.  Hong Kong filmmaker Mabel Cheung takes on the difficult job 
of weaving a huge amount of information into a movie, under the 
Herculean restraints of co-production with the mainland Chinese and its 
heavy burdens of ideological censorship.  The film was first released 
with 18 minutes (mostly dealing with Chiang Kai-Shek) cut by China; that 
footage has been restored here.
     Ms. Cheung handles her arduous task with style and grandeur, but 
also with the clichE9s and trivialities that so often come with this =
kind of historical reduction.  She's best on the grand scale: there are 
images that are stunning in their visual and emotional impact.  But 
ultimately the characters, despite some excellent performances, remain 
stifled by the movie's inevitable shorthand.  There are some 
inconsistencies in the telling, and some lapses in judgment. 
     The story's conscience, narrator, and central figure is Mme. Sun, 
the passionate idealist ("loved her country" ) who seized the 
ideological banner of revolution at her husband's untimely death, and 
forged China's relationship with the USSR.  Maggie Cheung is very good, 
as is Michelle Yeoh (Crouching Tiger) as the financier ("loved money").  
Perhaps best of all is Wu's steely Chiang.  The Soong Sisters is digest 
history, too truncated even at 2-1/2 hours, but it's worth wading 
through for the education it provides.

Title
Review for Dish, The (2000)
     It's not that there are no good movies.  It's just that the chains 
can't be bothered to show them.  Take The Dish, a delightful Australian 
comedy that picked up nine nominations from the Film Critics Circle down 
under, and has been an audience favorite at festivals.  UA opened it 
here last Friday at the De Vargas, with no critics' screening or advance 
notice.  By the time you read this it will most likely be gone.  UA, you 
see, only brought it in for a week to keep a few seats warm until they 
hit us next week with the $100 million video game adaptation Tomb 
Raider, which they plan to spread across three screens, two at the North 
and one at De Vargas.
This is not to knock Tomb Raider, which for all we know may be the 
best thing since the Cooking Channel.  But wouldn't two screens do?  And 
leave us one for The Dish, as a sop to that small but deserving audience 
who would rather see a hilarious and moving little character-based 
comedy than watch Angelina Jolie riding a motorcycle and kicking ass.
But back to The Dish.  The tiny town of Parkes, New South Wales is, 
in 1969, the proud home of the Southern Hemisphere's largest radio 
telescope - a 1,000 ton dish that towers over a sheep paddock.  When 
NASA launches Apollo 11 toward the moon, it needs a backup facility to 
relay the signals from Neil Armstrong's historic "giant leap for 
mankind" when its Goldstone, California dish is on the wrong side of the 
planet.  
Parkes is agog.  The Prime Minister (Bille Brown) is coming.  The 
American Ambassador (John McMartin) is coming.  The Mayor (Roy Billing) 
and his wife Maisie (Genevieve Mooy) are beside themselves with the 
honor, even if their sullen rebel of a teenage daughter Marie (Lenka 
Kripac) is not.  And out at the facility, the small team of scientists 
led by director Cliff Buxton (Sam Neill) and NASA overseer Al Burnett 
(Seinfeld's Patrick Warburton) is nervously preparing for its moment of 
history. 
Director and co-writer Rob Sitch (The Castle) weaves the charm of a 
comedy of quirky small-town characters with the excitement of one of 
history's most world-uniting events, with 60 million people glued to 
their black-and-white televisions ("And do the people in India get to 
watch it?" sniffs Marie.)  Neill anchors the movie with his tweedy, 
almost unflappable father-figure of a project director, and the rest of 
the cast is wonderful too.  The movie is filled with little human 
things, some of them very real and understated, some of them played for 
character zaniness, but Sitch never crosses the line to comic 
condescension.  Much of it is funny, some of it is thrilling, some of it 
brings a tear to the eye.  It does have a few downside moments, such as 
having to listen to Oliver's "Good Morning, Starshine" warbling on the 
sound track, but it's a small price to pay.
If UA doesn't have the sense to hold The Dish over, keep an eye on 
The Screen over at CSF, where they'll be trying to get hold of it in the 
next few weeks. 
The Screen, by the way, is going this week with a festival of Toto 
movies.  No, not the little dog from Kansas, but the phenomenally 
popular Italian screen clown who at the height of his popularity in the 
'50s and '60s was regarded as one of cinema's greatest comics, on a par 
with Chaplin and Keaton.  Toto was born in 1898 to impoverished 
gentility (he was a Neapolitan baron) but became a true aristocrat with 
his ascension to movie stardom after a successful career in Italian 
music hall, where he honed his comic persona, which  was Chaplinesque, 
but also utterly and distinctively his own. 
He was the titular character in a whole series of Toto comedies, a 
number of which will be at The Screen's festival and all of which are 
well worth seeing.  But don't miss Big Deal on Madonna Street, in which 
Toto joins a cast headed by Vittorio Gassman and Marcello Mastroianni to 
pull off a jewel heist in Rome.  This classic 1958 comedy, directed by 
Mario Monicelli, has been unsuccessfully copied a couple of times in 
American cinema, most recently by Woody Allen as Small Time Crooks.  The 
Screen will be showing it at 7:15 on Saturday and Monday evenings, with 
a 3:00 matinee on Sunday afternoon. 
