Authors
Balaji
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Salaam Cinema (1995)
     The Iranian director Mohsen Makhmalbaf has been asked to make a
film commemorating cinema's 100 years: he begins by putting an ad in
the Teheran papers for a 100 extras: 5000 people show up.  The stampede
scene as they break the gates and pour into the studio compound is
electrifying, one of the great crowd scenes in cinema:  think, perhaps,
of the Odessa steps in Potemkin.  An attempt at imposing order by
passing out forms is soon drowned in a sea of grasping hands filling
the entire screen; the sea dissolves to an ocean of heads with paper
fluttering over them.  Brilliant, pulse-racing film-making.
     Thus begins an entertaining inquiry into the nature of cinema.
Makhmalbaf, forced by events to improvise, decides to turn his screen
tests into a film.  The aspiring stars are asked to perform for the
camera, explain why they are here, express emotion for the camera, go
down under a bullet from Makhmalbaf's finger.  Reality merges
seamlessly with the cinematic illusion:  a young blind man performs a
melodrama for his screen test, and is in serious discomfort when the
director asks him to remove his glasses and expose his eyes to view.
It turns out his blindness was merely part of a persona he donned for
his screen test.  A woman claims she wished to be in a Makhmalbaf film
in order to leave Iran: it will perhaps be invited to Cannes, and thus
she will be reunited with her lover in Europe.  However, she will not
lose her dignity before the camera.  Makhmalbaf instructs her to tell
the camera that there are limits to what she will do to be with her
lover, and then leave.  So: has she now acted in a film? (This film did
go to Cannes.) What is real here, what feigned? Were these directorial
set pieces, or did it all "really happen" just so, under the camera's
gaze?  How many pairs of shades, of eyes, must be shed to arrive at an
unmediated vision?  Are we ever not performing? How much has cinema
itself shaped how each of us views ourselves? A man appears convinced
he resembles Paul Newman: under questioning he reveals he has never
seen Paul Newman at all, he has just been told so by his friends.
Nonetheless, that has shaped _who_he_really_is_: in his everyday
persona he has acquired a strut and a pout in the manner of a screen
idol.
     The main event is the tussle of two women, Maryam and Farha, with
Makhmalbaf himself.  The discomfort of an untrained actor attempting to
produce strong emotion on tap leads to genuine emotion, exposed to a
pitiless camera gaze.  The women soon are in passionate argument with
Makhmalbaf about the artist's struggle to retain her humanity under the
strenuous demands of her art; Makhmalbaf himself is shown visibly
discomfited when confronted with his own manipulative torment of the
women.  (Or was this a role he was playing? For the movie, for himself,
for the women, to elicit from them the performances he wanted?)
     The startling and unique achievement of the film is to show there
is high drama in the human everyday, that the variety and range of
human experience can be captured in a simple unadorned cinematic look
at the sensitive beauty of a human face, that there is redemption in
the love of art and performance, which finally cannot be crushed, not
even by the ayatollahs.
     The ayatollahs of Hollywood: now, that is another story.  The
processing of faces, bodies, stories into the rigid strictures of the
studio exec's narrow mind is exposed here, down to its fundamentalist
core, by the simple magic of a camera on an ordinary human face.  One
plump, bespectacled Maryam, shapeless in an overcoat and chador,
expressed more of the range of human experience than a dozen Julia
Robertses and Tom Cruises could in a dozen lifetimes.  One Makhmalbaf
with a single camera captured more of the magic of cinema than the
entire Spielberg galaxy.
