Authors
Ralf Benner
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
     America's favorite director Steve Spielberg made in 1993 a movie
no one thought he could.  SCHINDLER'S LIST is not only unlike anything
the artist has done before, there's a new level of maturity in his
artistry, an intellectual ripeness and restraint that, permitting
humility, exceed his own expectations.  And certainly ours: had we not
known who directed this emotional blockbuster, could we have correctly
guessed?  As Holocaust drama, we wait for the mandatory scenes--the
roundup of Jews, the starvation and humiliations, the trains to
Auschwitz, the gas chambers.  They come, but not in the way we
anticipate.  Just as we're steeling ourselves against the coming
horrors, there are interventions not only granting us reprieves but a
few startlingly comic ones.  Sometimes there are no stays of execution;
we're made to watch a Nazi camp commandant use victims as if targets in
a shooting gallery, or, in the one method used most, view random
murders by graphic shots to the head.  As the movie progresses, we
realize that Oskar Schindler, a German Catholic manufacturer-raconteur,
will at some point move beyond his calculated indifference, but what
Spielberg keeps up unrelentingly is the terror of inconstancy--how, as
one of the supporting characters tells, the rules by which one might
believe he'll survive are forever changing.  The only lifeline we have
is the pre-knowledge that the story's about a reluctant hero: when Liam
Neeson's Schindler breaks down over his guilt--a universal guilt--in
not saving more Jews, there can not be a dry eye amongst non-Jews.  I
dare say, not even amongst adult deniers.  Spielberg has worked over
our emotions before, but as fantasy: people still get mushy and teary
thinking of E.T. putting his arms around little Elliott--a sob-soaking
happy farewell that satisfies our dreams for that visitor from another
planet.  Here in SCHINDLER'S LIST, Spielberg is at the apex of his
directorial powers, and never more powerful than at the climax; when
it's over, we're shattered.  As if to one day address the doubters,
Tennessee Williams once wrote that "truth is the only purification,"
and, with all deliberateness, it's now Spielberg's credo.
     Opening and closing in color, the dramatic account of Oskar
Schindler is in a newsreel-like black and white by Janusz Kaminski, who
gives the images a state-of-the-art clarity as well as, at times, a
relieving farawayness, the distance almost a safety factor for us,
keeping us from overloading; at the same time he provides a very
distinctively horrific film-noir effect, in fact, moves beyond it:  the
light and dark and shadows emphasize what the French critics used to
describe 18th and 19th Century British Gothics as --"roman noirs."
Spielberg insisted on non-color because all of his visual memories of
the Holocaust came out of black and white news footage and
documentaries.  Excepting actual witnesses, his memories are ours, and
though both Spielberg and Kaminski have admitted that they often could
not bare to watch through the camera some of the scenes they were
filming, their instincts about what they did film and how they did it
seem guided by their higher powers: in their aversion, they have
renewed the strength of black and white.
     This achievement couldn't have come about without the magnificent
production design, the real technical star of SCHINDLER'S LIST.  In the
reams of just praise being heaped on Spielberg, Kaminski, film editor
Michael Kahn and screen adapter Steven Zaillian, there are few if any
words about designer Alan Starski.  His sets and real locales, street
scenes and backgrounds provide the very basics for the movie's visual
tone; without his selections' eerie rightness, we might have a
production a little too perfectly constructed, looking a little too
fresh to convince us.  And while other Holocaust dramas have had
characters react to the sickening sweet stench of burning flesh or have
included glancing scenes of the belching smoke stacks, they've usually
avoided the human ashfall that occurred.  Not here: the ashfall is
devastatingly beautiful in a most indescribably chilling way, and the
coal conveyer used to dump the dead in gigantic pyres, which would burn
for a week or more, is a surrealist's conception of a Wagnerian
apocalypse.
     When Spielberg's gone serious on us in the past, as in THE COLOR
PURPLE and EMPIRE OF THE SUN, we detected the bogus.  Exempting its
spectacular Shanghai action sequence, EMPIRE OF THE SUN was so veneered
with Fellini-like production values as juxtapositions that we were
neither very sure what was going on nor cared; there was no emotional
investment in the characters and, like his Neverland epics and most
recently in JURASSIC PARK, Spielberg's energy and concentration felt
dispersed in too many directions and he couldn't get all the elements
to mesh.  I fought my displeasure of his version of Alice Walker's
novel due in large measure to the fact that I've never trusted writers
whose books are letters to God. ("Are You Running With Me, Jesus?"
comes to mind.)  Compelling in its phoniness, THE COLOR PURPLE became
episodic black soap, and Spielberg's clamoring for "respect" as movie
maker and not as money maker never more obvious.  You don't feel any
pressure to defer to him in SCHINDLER'S LIST.  Despite the
message-ladened heaviness and his own well-publicized emotional
tribulations while filming, Spielberg's a freer artist than we would
have ever thought he could be, having for so long been held hostage to
computers and story boards.  Similar to Agnieszka Holland's EUROPA
EUROPA, Spielberg de-cliches the Holocaust with wonderments
of incongruity: Schindler flirting with candidates for typing jobs;
Schindler openly kissing a Jewess in front of German military
hierarchy; camp children hiding from death in outhouses, deep in
excrement; dark blood gushing from heads onto snow; German soldiers
listening in silent bewilderment to the chants of Jews at Shabbat
services--a confirmation of the stories in the impacting VOICES FROM
THE HOLOCAUST, in which survivors claim that regular German soldiers
(as opposed to those of the S.S.) were if not sympathetic then tolerant
and, if they wouldn't be caught, agreeable to a conspiracy of escape.
What makes all of this and so much more a continual jaw-dropper is that
while we're aware Spielberg speeded up production to meet a Christmas
release date, there's no sense of rush; the pacing is luxuriant.
     Much praise has been heaped on Ben Kingsley as accountant Itzhak
Stern--especially by the Jewish members of the audience--that I think
it's almost a reflex response, and understandably prejudicial.  He's
masterfully understated, even when he looks like author-AIDS activist
Larry Kramer, but objectively, his character as victim-survivor is
pre-packaged; he's not bringing anything new to Spielberg's vision.
Englishman Ralph Fiennes as Amon Goeth, the commandant of the
concentration camp, doesn't bring much that's fresh, either, in that
Spielberg emblemizes all of his hated Nazis.  He's extremely watchable
however: he revives in memory portions of Marlon Brando in THE YOUNG
LIONS, and Lee Harvey Oswald too, and there's a touch of Oskar Werner
in his voice.  The real adhesive, though, is Liam Neeson.  His face
looking oddly broad and flattened, in what I've read is a
Spielberg-inspired genuflection to late Time-Warner chieftain Steve
Ross, with a subtle pancakey quality of the Joker, Neeson at first
seems rather like a Bela Lugosi as the Phantom from the Cabaret, and
absolutely fitting--the blood of his own humanity having already been
transfused to God only knows where.  In silk suits, drinking premium
booze as fortification, Neeson's faithful to the real Schindler, for he
was womanizer, unrepentant hedonist, fallen Catholic, and
(questionably) apolitical as a means of survival.  And he wasn't above
using forced Jewish labor as means of enriching himself financially or
taking up residence in a previously Jewish-owned home.  (In real life,
Schindler made attempts to find the original owners to pay them for it;
Robert Mitchum's Pug in THE WINDS OF WAR also did.)  It's also true
that for Schindler, as with so many, the lives of a few Jews were
expendable in the name of wider German glory, war having a price that,
he bemoans in the movie, brings out the very worst in people.  It isn't
until Schindler sees the merciless destruction of Jewish ghettos in
Poland that he begins to realize that eliminating all Jews isn't "just
good old Jew-hating talk, it's official policy."  When he's approached
by a daughter of two elder Jews who face death and she begs him to take
them into his factory "haven," he's at first infuriated that, one, his
own business is regarded as such, and two, that it's true: his business
is indeed serviced by those without skills, being used by Kingsley to
keep selected Jews alive.  Realizing that his own country is determined
to annihilate the Jews, his insouciance changes.  But not his demeanor
of Germanic pride; it's still arrogant, still crafty, and he uses it as
a means to stall or stop the Nazis from killing people he's determined
to save.  As we watch him wield his considerable persuasion, we
perceive that the Nazis he's bargaining with secretly admire him,
though they nor we are sure why.  From THE GOOD MOTHER onward, Neeson
has steadily climbed towards the top of the list of actors who have
become so sexually magnetic that critics--especially John Lahr of The
New Yorker, in reviewing the Broadway revival of ANNA CHRISTIE--have
compared him to the Brando of A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE.  Vanity Fair
calls him The Liam King.  The fiery animalism these writers suggest
hasn't yet reached the screen (neither in ETHAN FROME nor ROB ROY),
though none of us who've watched and admired him doubt it's coming.  As
Schindler, Neeson, sometimes with one eye in shadow, extinguishes the
potential heat of this appeal and instead is rather grotesque, even
pallid with his snob appetites.  His Germanic showmanship has an
Isherwood doominess, and while it's off-putting to our sensibilities at
the beginning, it's immediately spellbinding, and stays that way and
grows on us right to the finale.
     Not everything is topnotch: the daughter pleading to Schindler to
save her aging folks gets to see her audacity rewarded in a setup
that's just too neat; the little orphan in the muted red coat--homage
to the famous image in FORBIDDEN GAMES--is regrettably a cheap
expectation; the death of Amon Goeth lacks sting, as if it's an
after-thought, when what we need to feel is the resonance of
retribution.  There's a twinge of criticism to offer that after the
climax, Spielberg didn't know how to end his movie, because he keeps
tagging on additional bits.  The movie seems to really want to end as
we watch Neeson in his car, exiting the factory-camp.  In that we're
barely able to recover, these add-ons were designed for that very
purpose--to give us a chance to collect our disheveled, sobbing
selves.  And, naturally, to honor Schindler.  It's above reproach
morally, but it might have been more effective had Spielberg run the
credits while we watch the surviving Schindlerjuden put the stones on
his grave. (In many respects, Schindler is Judas in reverse: earning
praise from others for saving Jews, he earned the enmity of some
Germans: Writes Keneally, "He was hissed on the streets of Frankfurt,
stones were thrown, a group of workmen jeered at him and called out
that he ought to have been burned with the Jews."  Contemplating Judas's
demise, Schindler said, "I would kill myself--if it wouldn't give them
so much satisfaction."  He died October 9, 1974, in Frankfurt, from
advanced hardening of the arteries of the brain and heart.)
     The utter madness of critics' associations honoring SCHINDLER'S
LIST as best picture but denying its director has method--to enrage
Hollywood to feel compelled to finally honor Spielberg outright.
Besides, if you've made both the biggest moneymaker of all time and
SCHINDLER'S LIST in the same year, aren't you hands down the year's
best moviemaker?  Hollywood likes to keep its eye on the headlines,
too.  With some 20% of Americans willing to entertain the
inconceivable--that the Holocaust never happened--and with Bosnia a
nightly news reminder of "ethnic cleansing," Spielberg becomes the
movies' Elie Wiesel.  SCHINDLER'S LIST is a purifying bris--pulling
back the foreskin of mounting indifference, cutting away the shameful
neglect of Kingsley holds up the sheet with the names of those Neeson
will pay to save, he says, "The list is life."  Translated into
Hollywoodspeak, those glorious four words mean, "And the winner is..."

Title
Review for Under the Volcano (1984)
     Finishing Malcolm Lowry's UNDER THE VOLCANO, which took weeks to
get through, I had to concede it's a great book--a great bad book.  I
fought it not just because it's a ceaseless journey into the Hell of
drunkenness, or because of its hit or miss cinematic style, but
also--maybe mostly--because of what it insanely purports to be: an
illumination about how there's genius in alcohol.  Partially
autobiographical--Lowry, like his central character Geoffrey Firmin,
was an incorrigible drunk--the book is a maddening wish fulfillment
about booze as a blessing or cure instead of a curse.  Lowry attempts
to persuade that in alcohol a writer can achieve a mind-blowing
success, that in the bottle a person can fight off loneliness and
lovelessness.  You don't have to be a convert to A.A. to know that is
the big lie--or, as Lowry himself writes somewhere in the novel,
"dehydrated excrement." The book's own notorious unreadability is
confirmation of the lie he's perpetuating.  Nevertheless, his effort is
astounding; the interpolation of sloshed perceptions and prolixity as
streams of foggy consciousness--embellishing the story of a 1930s world
and specifically Mexico losing its moral values to Fascism--have been
compared to James Joyce's ULYSSES and Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS.  And
who could doubt that Lowry aims for these lofty literary plateaux? Yet
a good case could be made that he's only a step or three away from the
novels I think, in his boozed-up consciousness, he quite possibly stole
from:  Graham Greene's CONFIDENTIAL AGENT and THE POWER AND THE GLORY
and Hemingway's THE SUN ALSO RISES and FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS.  And,
even more than those, from D.H.  Lawrence's PLUMED SERPENT.
     When Lowry originally wrote UNDER THE VOLCANO in 1936, it was a
7,000-word short story about a British Consul's experience during a
fiesta in Mexico, where he was accompanied by his daughter Yvonne and
her fiance named Hugh.  The basic story then is as it remains in the
novel--about tourists watching fascist peladoes robbing, plundering,
murdering and getting away with all of it.  The Consul, Yvonne and Hugh
come across a dying victim of murder but due to the Mexican civil law
at the time--a form of the Napoleonic code (some of which is still in
effect)--anyone assisting a victim becomes an accessory after the
fact.  The message of Fascism clear: guilty until proved innocent.  A
few years later, when Lowry went to Mexico, the story evolved into a
novel with subsequent changes that (at least I think) make the
narrative of the characters indigestible: Lowry made Yvonne his
actress-wife and Hugh his half brother, as well as making Firmin an
ex-Consul who remains in Mexico--for no other reason than to indict its
system of justice.  ("The Plumed Serpent" starts out as an indictment
of a Celtic woman's initial prejudicial views of Mexican culture.)
Yvonne's presence bothers the reader by the simple fact that there's no
reason for her to be there.  As the novel starts, she's left Firmin
because of his boozing and then she reappears showing a new-found
patience, making inexplicable pleas to have children, making out to be
the wife she understandably couldn't be previously, even though
Firmin's alcoholism has now progressed beyond repair.  Perhaps because
there are so many religious symbols--the story, which has an ULYSSES
time span of only twenty four hours, takes place on the ghoulish
Mexican celebration of The Day of the Dead--Yvonne's a foreboding
apparition, a sacrifice to the Old Testament's cannibal sun god Moloch,
filtered through Mexican mythology.  Does it make any kind of sense
that an ex-wife would return to a supposedly fascist country and
attempt a reconciliation with a fatalist boozer like Firmin? Had Lowry
retained his initial concept of Yvonne as Firmin's daughter, we could
see the reason for her return--to attempt to save the old man from
himself and the fascists.  Her fate would also make much more tragic
sense.  In transposing the Florence Nightingale act from Yvonne to
Hugh, Lowry may, as English poet-critic Stephen Spender suggests in an
essay published in some editions of UNDER THE VOLCANO, be trying to
formulate a sexual repression angle but nowhere did I get any such
impression.  (According to Spender, the half-brother in his cowboy
boots and hat and blue jeans spouting a lot of flatulent
Marxist-Catholic rhetoric--some of it cut for the movie--is probably a
copy of the young Firmin.  Maybe.  But does it matter?) When Lowry
finished the second draft in 1941, it was turned down by four
publishers and though the reasons are unknown, one doesn't really have
to assume that it's not only his booze-soaked prose and depressions
that bothered them but also that, having lost their original poignancy,
Yvonne and Hugh are only there as targets for Firmin to aim his
declamations.
     Spender writes, "UNDER THE VOLCANO is an authentic modern tragedy
because somehow the murder of the Consul by the fascist police
transforms his life into a convincing affirmation of values which he
deeply knew, and which in his own consciousness he did not destroy."
Well, yes and no.  The affirmation isn't quite as convincing as Lowry
attempts to make it because he not only invokes the tiresome Christ
analogy, he tries to link it to one of the two William Blackstones in
history.  In both the novel and movie, summoning up the clergyman
William (1595-1675), who became the first white settler in Boston,
Firmin feels an affinity with Blackstone because when the Puritans
settled in Boston, Blackstone found their intolerance unacceptable and
moved elsewhere and preferred mingling with the local Indians instead
of the bigots.  This gets confusing: despite Firmin's admiration for
the 1st William, Firmin really doesn't show much tolerance for
Mexicans, and Lowry himself often misread the vicissitudes of Mexican
cultural ways, at one point so insistently querulous that he was
deported.  (Though he had a love/hate relationship with Mexico, he
wrote an unpublished novel entitled "La Mordida" that most likely is an
excoriation.) But there's a second Blackstone who, coming roughly a
hundred years later, was indeed value-affirming: he was a renowned
British jurist and legal scholar, whose four volume "Commentaries on
the Laws of England" were used for more than a century as the
foundation for all legal education in Great Britain and the U.S.  This
is the Blackstone who is closer to Firmin's politics.
     Further, the affirmations of values in Firmin don't register as
convincing because long before the ending, his consciousness is
destroyed by the bottle.  What Lowry does raise--at least in
fair-minded readers--is the dual specters of anti-Semitism and
anti-Capitalism.  When the fascists (in the movie) hear the name
Blackstone, they assume it's Jewish and Firmin's only response is,
"Jews are seldom very borracho."  (Perhaps true in general but not,
I'll wager, of Jewish writers.) Neither the novel nor the movie give a
hint of an explanation as to why foreigners--Americans, the British and
the Dutch--were often objects of hatred in Mexico.  When the National
Revolutionary Party of Mexico took power in 1932, it implemented a six
year program for economic reform based on socialism that included a
labor code, public works, distribution of land and, when necessary,
seizure of foreign-controlled oil fields and other capitalist
undertakings.  Anathema to the outsiders.  The expropriation of the oil
fields began in 1938--roughly a year before the novel starts--when the
oil companies refused to submit to the demands of higher wages for the
Mexican workers.  In retaliation, the executives refused to import
Mexican oil.  Though this changed when W.W.II commenced, what didn't
change was the new round of animosity of Mexicans for gringos.  This
disparity between the rich foreign exploitists and the poor indigents
appears only on the surface in the book and movie.  It's this
one-sidedness to the horror show of UNDER THE VOLCANO that invalidates
it: when the capitalists cried foul over the moral indignation of
fascism in Mexico, much as they do elsewhere today, the strong
likelihood is that the criers were barred from exploitation and got
treated as what they were (and still are)--rapists.
     Director John Huston and screenwriter Guy Gallo are more than
reasonably faithful to the novel--everything is heavy with slumberous
reverence.  It's also what's wrong with the movie.  Because Lowry
employs movie devices--flashbacks, flashbacks-inside-flashbacks,
seemingly camera-like instructions and descriptions of settings and
characters that are close-ups, having characters involved in the movie
business (Lowry spent some time in Hollywood), using movies and their
titles symbolically--it's understandable why it's been said that the
book has attracted more directors and writers than any other novel
except Paul Bowles' SHELTERING SKY in the last forty years.  Lowry even
tried to adapt it.  The cirrhotic theme of alcoholism the major
attraction and challenge.  (Joseph Losey wanted to film it, with a
script by Cabrera Infante, and with Jane Fonda as Yvonne.)  But Huston
didn't find a way to bring much of Lowry's streams of radiant verbiage
to the screen with matched visuals.  Though there are fleeting glimpses
of the mythologicalized volcanoes Popocateptl and Ixtaccihuatl in an
appropriately diffused color, almost a dignified black and white,
supplied by Gabriel Figueroa (who also did Huston's NIGHT OF THE
IGUANA), they're obligatory, and as figuratively vacant as the
adaptation.  What we get of Mexico itself--the setting is Cuernavaca
but filming was done in Morelos--is all too proper and unblurred, all
too clean, as if the sirvientas swept away all the doom and gloom of
Lowry's pesadilla before the camera started to roll. (As with
Lawrence's PLUMED SERPENT, it's Lowry's descriptions of Mexico that are
the best parts of his book.) Huston has eliminated all the fever and
rot and highly toxic imagery--the whole thing looks like a Spic and
Span hangover.
     In the novel Firmin is constantly on the move, belying the often
accepted generality that most drunks are probably sedentary, and Huston
keeps his Firmin--Albert Finney--in constant motion as well.  The
movement keeps all the talk from becoming too weary for viewers, but it
also makes us see that Finney's becoming much too mechanical of an
actor, using all the externals to impress but unable to show what's
inside.  Most of his inability stems from the fact that he doesn't have
the right material from the novel to get into Firmin, so the reliance
on physically impressing us is heavily used.  In MURDER ON THE ORIENT
EXPRESS and THE DRESSER and now here, Finney is a superb technician.
And proving once more that the British make the best screen dipsos.  As
Firmin his bloated tummy and engorged fingers are right on, and when
he's guzzling straight from the bottle, sometimes making near-gagging
sounds, or drinking his after-shave, or wobbling through hopscotch, the
waste is obscene and frightening.  For the first time in some years, we
see evidence of his "Tom Jones" handsome boyishness which, in a movie
way, makes his Firmin all the more sad in that he suffers from faulty
pride and from his idiot thinking that he can't tolerate the love of
others.  In pictures published in Douglas Day's biography of Lowry, and
on display in the 1976 Oscar-nominated documentary "Volcano: An Inquiry
into the Life and Death of Malcolm Lowry," certain periods of him,
especially when he's flabby from drink and in his goatee, suggest a
blend of D. H. Lawrence and Lenin.  Photos of earlier years tease
with a bit of Hermann Goering, and there's a little of that monster in
Finney as well.  The pictures also show that Lowry never quite got the
hang of wearing belts, and this is given a loving nod in the movie when
Finney uses a tie to keep his white suit pants up.  As "chief of
borrachos," Finney bends and curves his lines, and he sure knows how to
flop out on streets, but he's exhausting; we watch and admire
enormously but, finally, it's all an updated message--The Days of
Tequila and Mescal.
     At the beginning of the movie, there's something in Finney's duck
walk that brought Richard Burton to my attention.  Conflicts in
scheduling prevented Burton from doing the role he was the most
qualified to play.  In his last years, Burton had the dissipated, burnt
out look that I envisioned in Firmin, in fact the visionary apocalyptic
look that's required.  In Burton (as well as Firmin and his creator) is
the search for something of value that would forever escape them
because they couldn't escape the ravages of the bottle.  There are
countless arias in the novel that demand Burton.  What I wouldn't give
to hear him sing this one:
     "How many bottles since then? In how many glasses, how many
bottles had he hidden himself, since then alone? Suddenly he saw them,
the bottles of aguardiente, of anis, of jerez, of Highland Queen, the
glasses, a babel of glasses--towering, like the smoke from the train
that day--built to the sky, then dens, the bottles breaking, bottles of
Oporto, tinto, blanco, bottles of Pernod, Oxygenee, absinthe, bottles
smashing, bottles cast aside, falling with a thud on the ground in
parks, under benches, beds, cinema seats, hidden in drawers at
Consulates, bottles of Calvadoes dropped and broken, or bursting into
smithereens, tossed into garbage heaps, flung into the sea, the
Mediterranean, the Caspian, the Carribean, bottles floating in the
ocean, dead Scotsman on the Atlantic highlands--and now he saw them,
smelt them, all, from the very beginning--bottles, bottles, bottles,
and glasses, glasses, glasses, of bitter, of Dubonnet, of Falstaff,
Rye, Johnny Walker, Vieux Wiskey blanc Canadien, the aperitifs, the
digestifs, the demis, the dobles, the noch ein Herr Obers, the et glas
Araks, the tusen taks, the bottles, the bottles, the beautiful bottles
of tequila, and gourds, gourds, gourds, the millions of gourds of
beautiful mescal..."  Lowry's description of the morning after is, then,
a classic: "An inconceivable anguish of horripilating hangover
thunderclapping about his skull, and accompanied by a protective screen
of demons gnattering in his ears."
     The more one considers the failure of UNDER THE VOLCANO as movie,
and it's a failure of conception, the more one might believe that it
should be an opera.  There probably isn't any other way to include all
those paragraphs that cry out for rich, expansive voices.  Placido
Domingo as Firmin, and a Greek-like chorus igniting to flames the
descriptive prose.  And the melodramatic apparatus of opera might
rescue Yvonne too--increasing the depth and scope of her fate.
There's another, more troubling part of the novel that keeps it from
translating with intended righteousness: Franco's Spain.  The novel
(and the movie) uses the twin volcanoes as premonitory symbols for one
very obvious polemic: Lowry, and well as other writers and journalists,
believed that a populist uprising would explode against what they
perceived as Franco-inspired Fascism in Mexico.  It didn't, not only
because the writers' idea of fascism was in fact anti-Americanism (and
always soothed when the greenbacks rolled in), the lawlessness they
condemned had been there long before political labels were attached.
One of the suspicious omissions by Lowry and by the critics who praised
his book (which sold roughly 30,000 copies during its initial shelf
life) is that Franco, at the time of the novel's publication in 1947,
was ensconced in a 9th year of a thirty-nine year reign, which saw no
revolt, and he was, it should be noted, allied with the Spanish Roman
Catholic Church.  With its giant cross, the Valley of the Fallen, built
in honor of those who died during the Civil War and where Franco is
buried, is the most loathsomely powerful monument to Fascism
remaining.
     In both the book and movie there are repeated references to LAS
MANOS DE ORLAC--THE HANDS OF ORLAC--a movie better known to audiences
as MAD LOVE, the 1935 Peter Lorre chiller in which he plays a doctor
who grafts the hands of a murderer onto a pianist.  It's likely that
Lowry's saying his own hands were his mad love given up to his own
Moloch--he wouldn't keep them off the bottle.  Only he doesn't seem to
want to admit why; he has no Lorre to blame.  He tried though when he
once wrote, "The real cause of alcoholism is the complete baffling
sterility of existence as sold to you." There's nothing new in what
he's excusing his behavior for--the need to escape boredom. (And I
haven't any doubt that his thumbnail truism resonates empathetically
with literary-minded boozers.)  UNDER THE VOLCANO is Lowry's ultimate
escape--reaching for a state of genius before exploding.  He was in the
process a tortured soul who, in a fit of depression, died in his own
vomit induced by an overdose of pills and booze.  It wasn't his
acquired love mescal but gin--probably Bole's.  (The last music he
might have heard that night was "Le Sacre du Printemps.")  What's god
damn scary is that he did it on my birthday.  The irony had me hitting
my own mad love--Myers, original dark.

Title
Review for Fearless (1993)
     Jeff Bridges moves right into the front ranks of American actors
with his performance as Max in Peter Weir's FEARLESS.  Because the
movie takes us deep into one of our worst fears--knowing that we could
die in a plane crash--Bridges's work here is a balancing act; he has to
make us believe in him as plane crash survivor, a savior and that he's
so full of bliss as a result of the crash that he's temporarily without
fear.  This series of character shifts would drive any really good actor
to boozing, because so much of what Max does is conveyed by thoughts
behind the eyes, behind the silences.  Movie actors rarely get into this
kind of cerebral communication, and maybe the only ones who'd dare to
try are those unafraid of the unrelenting, magnifying camera.  Bridges's
emotional marvel of an achievement is all the more singular in that
Weir puts the camera right on top of him.  Close-ups are perilous in
that they can distort as well as expose a lack of technique; when the
camera is practically breathing on them, most actors fall back on handy
poses and stares and audiences can sense that sometimes there's nothing
behind the masks.  This happens a lot to Robert Redford and Clint
Eastwood, occasionally to Robert Duvall.  Not here: as the camera moves
in, Bridges keeps right on going, holding back nothing; the close-in
camera accelerates his rapport with us, soothing our qualms. (In the
opposite direction, Michael Douglas's crowd-pleasing male bitchery gets
cheerfully speeded up when the camera gets in his face and we see the
flaws and nearly feel the fire breath coming out of him, but he's
safe--he's always playacting.) What makes unsafe Bridges a
revelation--and how good Weir is as director--is that while we can feel
the fears of the passengers and the haunted doubts and troubles of the
survivors, we're able to feel Max's sudden freedom from mortality as
our own anxieties are ever-increasing.  In that FEARLESS plays havoc
with our gloom-filled anticipations about what we know is coming, there
are times when we hate Weir for putting us through what would otherwise
seem like a depressing chronology of events from a TV
disaster-of-the-week film (in fact, Charlton Heston played in one, from
the pilot's perspective)--and some of us hated the movie company for
having the insensitivity to release this picture at a time when
millions of us would be flying over the holidays--but when the movie
climaxes and goes to black, we're absolutely wiped out yet strangely
exhilarated.  Some in the audience were crying, others sobbing, most of
us for a moment or two unable to move at all.  The impact rests on
Bridges's failure-proof hydraulics.  Has there ever been a more
reassuring face in a plane cabin, in life or on screen?
     Jeff Bridges has usually been an outsider looking in, big-time
success having eluded him despite appearing in more than twenty movies,
including THE LAST PICTURE SHOW, THE ICEMAN COMETH, KING KONG, WINTER
KILLS, BAD COMPANY, FAT CITY, SOMEBODY KILLED HER HUSBAND, CUTTER'S
WAY, THE MORNING AFTER, NADINE, the neglected TUCKER: THE MAN AND HIS
DREAM, THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS.  And in spite of scoring a mild success
with JAGGED EDGE, in which he pulled a Tommy Lee Jones from THE EYES OF
LAURA MARS: we're allowed to invest feelings in him, only to get
suckered.  His first Oscar nomination came for THE LAST PICTURE SHOW,
but it was his second Oscar-nominated performance, in THUNDERBOLT AND
LIGHTFOOt, that audiences perceived within him a loner's stir: he was
onto something unexpressed in his relationshp with Eastwood.  (And it's
what's not defined that has made the movie a cult favorite.)  I never
could get into STARMAN, for which he received his third nom, because it
committed very early on one of those entertainment no-nos by having
something called Karen Allen as a romantic co-star.  (Hiring her for any
movie is like breaking the unspoken law about having babies and kids in
soap operas: that is, no Allen, no babies and only kids who are bad
seeds.)  AGAINST ALL ODDS was a totally unnecessary remake of the
classic film noir OUT OF THE PAST, but certainly watchable: with
bronzy flesh, muscular chest, closely-cropped beard and sun-bleached
hair, Bridges's blue eyes stand out more than usual; they have the
deepest blue center and this blue bleeds to the outer perimeters in
lighter and lighter shades.  Faked? Maybe, yet he's never looked this
attractive before or since and I can't begin to tell you how much this
helps the movie, which is filled with a ton of ludicrous moments, the
most hilarious not the banging at the counterfeit Chichen Itza ruins
but the nipple bit at Rachel Ward's Cozumel hideaway.  Propped against
Bridges' chest, the gaunt, masochistic Ward flicks her fingers across
his nipples and instead of being aroused, he lays on some pro-football
gibberish, totally oblivious to his own erogenous zones.  (Some okay
touristy shots of Cozumel, the real Chichen Itza, a spectacular one or
two of Tulum, one of the most breathtaking spots in the Yucatan
peninsula, and an hysterical but hysterically good theme "Take A Look
At Me Now" by Phil Collins.)  In THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS, Bridges
didn't get the acclaim that his co-star Michelle Pfeiffer did but in
his blurry-eyed, greasy-haired seediness, he was its sick-soul center,
something like a Bukowski boozer on reduced intake maintenance, though
not quite the "cold razor-blade" Pfeiffer accuses him of being because,
after all, a cold blade wouldn't have insisted on his dog staying in a
swanky hotel room.  (Animal lovers surrendered to him no matter the
misgivings of his character once they saw Eddie the dog on couches,
beds and on that hotel ballroom stage, laying at the piano.) Before the
chance to show his magnum force in FEARLESS, Bridges came within
reasonable striking distance in Terry Gilliam's "The Fisher King,"
which is rather like the antithesis of his Max.  As a wrecked boozer
D.J. whose favorite pastime was pouncing on yuppies for advocating
"yuppie inbreeding" and for negotiating sex as "love moments," Bridges
got robbed of a full due because his character's transition happened
off screen, his drunk moments were fairly weak, and though he got
sturdier as the movie plodded along, most of our attention went to
Mercedes Ruehl, who, tramped to the max in red lipstick, red
fingernails, red bra and slip and off-the-shoulder blouse and dangling
"fuck me" earrings, never stopped acting, reacting, gesturing.  (When
the camera captured cigarette smoke blowing from her nostrils, she's a
magnificent retrograde dragon with that old time religion--a heart of
softened gold.)  She also blew Bridges away, though perhaps he let her.
But there's a connection between THE FISHER KING and FEARLESS.  In
the former, Bridges is one of the "janitors of God," called upon to
clean up the mess he's made of things, and to help clean up the mess of
his new best friend Williams.  The latter has him as one of the angels
of heroism, almost rapturously saving others and, finally, having to
save himself.
     If Bridges' dive into temporary decay and manginess in THE FISHER
KING doesn't altogether grab us because we're fixated on Ruehl,
Williams and, in her best screen performance to date, Amanda Plummer,
he certainly puts sleazer Mickey Rourke on notice in AMERICAN HEART.
Looking like too many bums walking the streets here in Houston (or the
cons who appear via satellite on Geraldo), in long hair pulled back in
a ponytail and unsightly mustache, with cigarette smoke clouding a
hardened-by-prison-life face, Bridges is one constant amazement: is
there any other American actor right now who can so physically give
himself over to scroungy characters and still keep us watching?  (Rourke
so immerses himself, as he does in BARFLY, that he becomes repulsive,
an audience turnoff.)  Unfortunately, as directed by Martin Bell and
written by Peter Silverman, AMERICAN HEART is overly depressing and,
sadly, boring: it's like a Bukowski story told from a
fifteen-year-old's point of view.  What we come away with is that crime
never pays--for the lower class.
     One of the crash survivors in FEARLESS, Rosie Perez, who's
somewhat like a dwarf Lena Olin, takes no back seat for acting honors;
she's prodigious in her mother's pain and guilt in believing she's
responsible for the death of her two-year-old Bubble, who was thrown
out of her protective arms when the plane impacted.  And when Bridges
forces her into recognizing that she's not at fault, you come close to
believing that the red tool box she holds in her arms is her baby; she
pulls from us primal instincts about our children in ways we've rarely,
perhaps never felt before from movies.  And though Weir gives her a
first scene of closure, setting to rest her agony and her appreciation
for all that Bridges has done for her, he gives her a second one that
makes it less of a neat sum-up; we can see in her eyes a whole litany
of regrets.  There are two scenes that don't quite satisfy.  When Perez
enters group therapy, her pent up anger is released, and while it's
logical,  she reaches such levels of piercing shrill that you can't
help but question why Weir didn't ask that she reduce the octaval tones
a bit.  The other is more a technical error:  Perez goes to see Bridges
in the hospital and she gives him a box of Whitman's Sampler.  Only
there's no plastic wrapping on the box.  Did the cast munch on the
goodies between takes?
     Playing Bridges' wife is the beautiful, crooked tooth Isabella
Rossellini.  Watching her here, or in one of my favorite movies
COUSINS, we're aware of a spiritual linkage between her and her
mother:we could swear that Ingrid is with us again, her presence so
strong and supportive.  It's too early to tell if Rossellini will be as
good an actress, but right now, she bests Ingrid in being natural,
at-home, without the little actressey tricks to fall back on, which
have sometimes marred Ingrid's performances.  With Bergman, there was
frequently an unwillingness to be exposed; she hid behind an aura of
cool stateliness that she actually fought against but often lost to.
Rossellini, maybe because she has her mother as object lesson, perhaps
because she's been a sought-after model, is the reverse:  she's artless
as vulnerability, which is what makes her so right and glowingly alive
in COUSINS; when Ted Danson, in his best screen role thus far, risks
all and asks her to dance at his father's wedding, the rush of love and
warmth is limitless.  The lack of self-centeredness helped her
enormously in BLUE VELVET, about which she was the only thing I found
worth watching.  (I know this will pique the Lynch fans, who can't seem
to get enough of his gory silliness.)  Here in FEARLESS, as a dance
instructor, she shows a maturity--and a thick neck--not seen
previously, and though she's been straight-forward about martial
problems (as with William Peterson in COUSINS), she hasn't before
played the troubled wife as a 911-er.  And she doesn't play the wife as
the Madonna of our dreams; her patience has its limits.
     Peter Weir may be the most talented director of the middle class's
contretemps and vicissitudes, showing us our own foibles, how we lock
ourselves into situations that we really deep down inside know are
hopeless or wrongheaded, no matter how meritorious the intent.  Those
who worship the director above all else might call Weir's mc
introspections his "auteur": the waste of young lives being needlessly
sacrificed in GALLIPOLI; Mel Gibson's reckless Australian journalist
in THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY barely escaping from the slaughter
as he runs to the last plane jetting out of an Indonesia dissolving
into chaos after years of corruption and apathy; Harrison Ford in THE
MOSQUITO COAST as the bespectacled, immersed in deglamorization Allie
Fox, novelist Paul Theroux's slowly-turning-mad adventurer-inventor
who, with his family, departs an America he believes will be destroyed
in an apocalyptic war and settles in a Central American country.
(Ford's a Robinson Crusoe with a "Lord of the Flies" cap on; he
pioneers his new world ingeniously, but the encroachment of
self-fulfilling doom, generated by his own paranoia, is always
festering within him.  That it's a fable is, I think, one of the
reasons Ford succeeds here: his legendary-like movie heroes give him
credence; he's been out of the real world for so long that it seems
natural for him to go mad.  It's not a pleasant character, and by the
end, knowing that he has destroyed himself and has come close to
destroying his family, he's thoroughly dislikable.  This is, of course,
why the public rejected the movie--it didn't want to see a hero
self-destruct.)  And there's the gooey WITNESS, filled with such
heavenly-blessed family values that to fault it might suggest to some
that I'm against family, against "goodness."  Weir dismisses the very
realities he uses to set the plot in motion--a young Amish boy
witnesses a murder and can identify the murderer--and we're never
allowed to see how what the boy witnessed affects him.  The real
witnessing is Harrison Ford's in how the Amish live so admirably their
humble lives--and how he's affected by it.  But the goodness in the
family life fails to reward the audience with what it wanted most: Ford
carrying off that Amish amazon (Kelly McGillis) at the end.
Intractable upper middle class values get the Weir once-over in DEAD
POETS SOCIETY which is rather like a catalyst to action against the
constrictions of humdrum education, and while it's not a mistake to put
a vibrant Robin Williams at the center, it is, I think, a mistake on
Weir's part to allow Williams his impromptu standup routines.  Harming
the movie even more is the destiny of one of the pupils; his fate is de
rigueur.
     The lack of box office for FEARLESS, considering its subject
matter and that its visual dinginess and claustrophobia intensify what
is a vivisection of pain, seems predictably bad movienomics--this is,
after all, a February or March kind of picture, when most of us are
safely away from airplanes.  But I'm fully prepared to defend Jeff
Bridges' performance as the most unfairly neglected in the 1993 awards
from critics' associations.  Nothing I've seen throughout that year
compares to what he does here, and that includes Hopkins in that
megabore THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  And politics, not acting, won Tom
Hanks his awards.  One certainty:  FEARLESS won't show up as any
in-flight entertainment.

Title
Review for Heaven & Earth (1993)
     Perhaps somewhere in the annals of forgotten intentions, director
Oliver Stone might have said to some hack reporter that he had always
had in mind a trilogy of movies about the Vietnam War.  The first,
PLATOON, about the actual war itself from a G.I.'s perspective; the
second, BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY, about a war hero who returns to
America to discover he's more despised than hailed; and a
third--WHEAVEN & EARTH bring this up because one of Stone's problems
has always been his inability to one-on-one sell his own product
because he's constantly shifting positions: he seems to say one thing
one day about his movies, and yet in another interview on another day
say something else entirely, often contradicting himself.  This was
most obvious and disturbing when conservatives jumped all over him
about JFK; Stone wouldn't admit that, as a refuter, he rigged his grand
mal of invective against the Warren Report.  Instead he fulminated
against his critics for perpetuating the grander lie.  Fair minded
viewers quickly perceived that JFK was a composite of theories, not
really meant to be at all definitive but exploratory--spasms of
conjecture to tantalize and reel us with possibilities and at the same
time admonish us for acquiescing to the volumes of purported facts.
JFK was dazzling, work-me-over movie making in the worst traditions of
yellow press muckraking: when we left the theatre, we conjured up the
worst scenarios for just about everybody, and this kind of cynicism was
and remains the movie's clarion attraction.  With an eye on the box
office, Stone elicited his detractors' often meaningless barrages--I'm
thinking of some of George Will's pomposity in defending status
quo--and never truer than when, on 60 Minutes, Andy Rooney made an ass
of himself (and unwittingly confirmed Stone's legitimate deploring of a
lazy press before the National Press Club in Washington) by trying to
joke that Stone was this era's Orson Welles looking for his Rosebud.
JFK is not Stone's CITIZEN KANE.  Far from it.  Had the movies'
preeminent contrarian shown class instead of boxing himself in, he
might have said that he made his own and much more exciting, horrifying
and brutal MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE.
     It is of course the quicksand that Stone, equal parts product and
producer of media splurge, can't resist: he likes to go the edges of
the pits he creates, and even if he tumbles into some of them, as he
did as writer for the exploiting MIDNIGHT EXPRESS and as director for
BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY, somehow he rescues himself by sheer gall and
temerity, which, as Americans, we often cheer more than we do those who
show respect for history or nations other than our own.  These are
movies that Stone owes us an apology for; these two false, pitched
melodramas, reeking with fabricated scenes and utterances and ultra-bad
casting (Tom Cruise as a paraplegic vet?), received the kind of
attention that later embarrasses the rational-minded--we realize that
all the hysteria comes from vengeful emotionality, in order to subvert
and controvert facts and humiliations.  There's not a god damn thing
that's admirable about Billy Hayes's story in MIDNIGHT EXPRESS; and
there's only pitiful contempt for those who continue to fight the
Vietnam War until they somehow win what they deserved to lose.
     Stone's frenzied method of reportage is undeniably what makes him
suspicious to many of us--he takes "true stories" and propagandizes not
the factual incidents themselves but the circumstances surrounding
them.  It's defensible with JFK because Stone was using thirty years
worth of everyone else's conspiracies and suppositions.  It's
indefensible regarding the overwrought BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY: as
pointed out by others, reel-life Ron Kovic evaded the major question:
"Why did the government tell lies about what the Vietnam War was
about?"  Because PLATOON was based, more or less, on Stone's own
experiences during the Vietnam War, questioning his veracity would be
dangerous, and I didn't when I first saw the movie, and, despite my
strong misgivings about HEAVEN & EARTH, I don't now.  PLATOON had the
feel of truth, of real experience in it, and I think the reactions of
our nation's Vietnam Vets was--and remains--the more significant
testimonial.  They responded to it as if it were a catharsis; they left
theatres shaken, or crying, or sobbing, their pain of waste &
dissolution given a salve.  When Jane Fonda attacked THE DEER HUNTER as
racist, she was once more pounced on as a traitor, but this time she
was absolutely right: Michael Cimino made a political tract that only
temporarily gave us the excuse we sought to feel smug and superior to a
tiny country that, short of nuking, we attempted to bomb into oblivion
and in the process helped kill more than two million of its citizens
and injured another three million.  This is why few can watch that
movie anymore--it being so egregiously slanted to protect ourselves
from our own crimes.  And this is most likely why PLATOON had such an
incredible impact only nine years later: despite all the amateurish
literary flourishes spoken by Charlie Sheen, despite the appallingly
effective misuse of Barber's "Adagio for Strings" during some of the
movie's most horrific moments, PLATOON was an "everyman's" epiphany of
our government's nearly intractable dumbheadedness.  And it did
something more:  it intimated how frequently our military's hierarchy
left our men in the lurch, to defend themselves and die as their
commanders, in the relative safety of Saigon or Washington, were lying
to an American press.  One of the quietly satisfying aspects about the
success of PLATOON is that while some movie critics, National Guard
right-wingers and draft-dodgers were proclaiming that they "didn't like
it," the fact is, this is categorically not a movie to like or dislike,
to love or hate; based on one's own experiences, you're either moved by
what it's saying and suggesting or you're not.  I knew this movie was
and would stay on the right track when, during its opening, we watched
the new G.I.s getting off their transports as others--in body
bags--were being loaded onto those transports.  I've still got in my
memory banks many images of the war, but none more evoking of stronger
emotions than this.  I'm a Vietnam-era vet who unaccountably spent his
term of service in the Baroque whimsy of Wurzburg, Germany and whose
cushy job it was to administratively process servicemen to and from
other military posts and during interviews with those who had been to
Vietnam, the reactions were almost always the same:  the initial shock
and sudden realization of possible death when they saw the rows of
corpses.  Those images were never discussed in basic and individual
training, those images hadn't yet appeared in Stars & Stripes, they
were rarely spoken of on Armed Forces Radio, but they were the subject
of endless conversations in the barracks, in the mess halls.  We didn't
know what post traumatic stress syndrome was in those days--it probably
hadn't even been coined yet--but we could tell who served in Vietnam
when we heard the screams from hellish nightmares during the night.
     HEAVEN & EARTH, based on two non-fiction books that are accounts
of Vietnamese surviving their country's war years, opens with
paradisical shots of agricultural lands and jutting mountains with low
clouds passing through them--the kind of setting one might imagine
would be the end result of the Genesis Device in STAR TREK: THE WRATH
OF KHAN.  The beauty of it all is Stone saying, "This is what it was
like before we got there." Soon after, when the American helicopters
and napalm arrive, we get the burnt out fields and villages, with Stone
lecturing, "This is what it was like after we got there."  Stone has
said repeatedly that HEAVEN & EARTH is a glimpse of what the Vietnamese
went through during the time the French and most specifically the
Americans descended upon them.  But HEAVEN & EARTH is not about the
Vietnamese proles--it's about an American movie maker's view of what a
Vietnamese woman, lucky enough to escape, endures through
Americanization.  This is not a minor quibble, it's a major beef.  This
is no more a movie about how the Vietnamese people lived through the
inferno mostly created by other nations--China, France, Japan, France
again, America, and China once more--than BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY is
about a disillusioned war hero returning to a jaded homeland.  HEAVEN &
EARTH is not overtly fraudulent--there probably isn't a major scene
that didn't happen to either the principals or others--but it feels
very fraudulent.  Except for a few terrorist threats by (we assume) the
Viet Cong, who warn the peasant farmers against betraying the
motherland, there's no believability that these Vietnamese have any
defining politics or even pride in nationality.  Worse, the bits and
pieces of their struggles to maintain a crazy kind of normalcy in daily
living amidst the incursions are, if not rehash from all the other
Vietnam War movies, then cursory.  Were there no schools for the kids?
Did no teens or young adults date and fall in love? There's a flimsy,
slow-motion reach towards Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS a la APOCALYPSE
NOW to remind us of war's inherent insanity but eventually the movie
tires itself out and becomes a rather mild, less affecting KILLING
FIELDS--we even get Haing S.  Nor as a loving father searching for his
pregnant daughter, reminiscent of Sam Waterston's pursuit of Nor
himself.
     During the opening, we get a very truncated narration by the
movie's heroine--played by newcomer Hiep Thi Le--that attempts to
establish perfunctory facts.  The facts are misleading: while I
couldn't swear to what Stone has her saying exactly, because it's
soft-spoken enough to miss parts, there is a major reference to the
defeat of the French (at Dien Bien Phu) in 1954, which, by Stone's
account, precipitated American intervention.  Not quite right: though
the French did depart in 1954, and though there was a brief diplomatic
solution known as the Geneva Accord which separated Vietnam into North
and South, providing a lull in major fighting until 1959 when Ho Chi
Minh stepped up gorilla warfare to further weaken the South's already
precarious government, and though the U.S. was sending "advisors"
steadily until 1965 when President Johnson ordered large numbers of
troops to intervene to save the South, the American government, under
Truman, was already and very directly involved in the re-colonization
of Indochina by France in 1946.
     While FDR adamantly and Truman less so opposed France's return
there, because it defied the American principle of independence for all
nations, and though both presidents were suspicious of France in that
it had cruelly exploited Vietnam in the past and despite France's
promise to grant autonomy to the Vietnamese probably wouldn't (and
didn't), the American position became one of acquiescence to France,
most likely because Charles de Gaulle, humiliated by the quick,
humiliating subjugation of his people to the Nazis, blackmailed
Truman:  If not permitted its undeserved spoils of the war, then
France, already haughty with demands in the rebuilding of Europe, would
resist cooperation in that reconstruction.  France's return to
Vietnam--facilitated by over 2 billion American 1940-50 dollars worth
of transport ships and materials--enraged Ho Chi Minh rather
understandably: America, a nation he had admired enormously, was
betraying its principles, especially since Ho believed that, with the
American pledge to grant independence to the Philippines, America
indeed "was for the free popular governments all over the world and
that it opposed colonialism in all its forms." (Ho had been appealing
for his nation's independence since 1919, when he went to the
Versailles Peace Conference to plead his case, but he had been turned
away without so much as a single hearing.) By late 1945, Ho had sent at
least eight appeals to Truman and the American Secretary of State, but
they were ignored.  War between the French and the Vietnamese started
in late 1946 and would continue until the French were surrounded and
nearly annihilated at Dien Bien Phu.  The ominous but ignored cost to
the French: over 50,000 lives, 100,000 injuries.  Part of Ho's brief
triumph when the French departed was the knowledge that he also
defeated America the betrayer.  Though Ho died before his countrymen
would defeat America a second time, there must be among Vietnamese an
additional yet savory satisfaction in the victory: that we did not
learn from history, even failing to learn from yesterday's failed
military tactics.  In a communique written in 1945 to de Gaulle by Bao
Dai, the last Emperor of Indochina, this was prophesied: "Even if you
come to re-establish a French administration here, it will no longer be
obeyed: each village will be a nest of resistance, each former
collaborator an enemy, and your officials and colonists will themselves
ask to leave this atmosphere which they will unable to breathe."
     Technically, none of this is what the movie is all about, but
remember, it's Stone who's telling us that he's made a
people-of-Vietnam movie from their perspective, which, reiterating, he
most certainly is not.  What HEAVEN & EARTH seems to be about is karma,
and rather tragi-yellow karma to boot: it suggests that the sum and
consequences of the heroine's life determined her fate--that she might
have deserved to be raped, that she was destined to meet and marry
psycho Sad Sack Tommy Lee Jones, that despite her capitalist success in
America she would return home to hear her brother scold her and America
for its continual punishment of her motherland that never deserved to
be the pawn it became in global power strategies.  As such, Hiep Thi
Le, a pre-med student in California, is surprisingly competent.  Like
the abused, neglected heroines proverbially carrying coals to New
Castle in American period-piece literature, Hiep Thi Le is required to
be weighted down and become the embodiment of the rice-fed Vietnamese
constitution; despite the upholstery-like coifs that make her look
stereotypically China Doll trampy, she sticks to you. (She's also got
the movie's only honest bit: when she jumps off a helicopter, with
child in tow, her purse falls to her knees, then feet.  She's also in a
scene that puts the fact checkers on the spot: there's a banner
advertising "double coupons" at the California grocery chain Ralphs.)
     The last time I saw Joan Chen, who plays Hiep's mother, was in
Bertolucci's snoozer THE LAST EMPEROR.  So fancily pictorial she seemed
a poster; there was more drama in the lobby stills of her than in the
movie itself.  And there was something unconvincing about her makeup:
she didn't age "naturally," she looked comically fakey.  This doesn't
happen to her here: while it takes time to get passed her mouth full of
rotten dentistry (or a lack of it, I could never tell for sure), she's
stunningly cosmeticized, you really believe what you see.  Her voice and
face now have a nobility you can't stop absorbing--she's a hybrid of
Glenn Close and Jessica Lange, with a slight amount of Olivia Cole as a
finishing touch.  In her last scenes, you realize it is her story that
you want to see, that she is the salt of Vietnam's earth Stone has
tried to turn Hiep Thi Le into.  This odd reversal happened in THE LAST
EMPEROR: at the beginning, when the dying empress, sounding like Meryl
Streep doing her OUT OF AFRICA routine, informed the young emperor
he'll inherit the throne, we're mesmerized: she's so debauched,
evil-eyed and practically levitating in the splendiferous surroundings
of the imperial palace--not unlike Jabba the Hut in THE RETURN OF THE
JEDI--that when the movie concluded, I flashed back to her, regretting
that I didn't see THE LAST EMPRESS.  When Hiep delivers the earth
mother bromides--the kind of platitudes all mothers want to hear, and,
in fact, HEAVEN & EARTH is dedicated to Stone's own mother--it's Joan
Chen who should be speaking.
     Someday a director will pick up THE TUNNELS OF CU CHI by Tom
Mangold and John Penycate and realize it's the book that America needs
as a movie.  (Anyone who's read it never forgets the snake.) With Mel
Gibson, whose frame and Stoogy risk-taking are perfect for traversing
those tunnels which terrorized Americans and are, in any variety of
ways, the real metaphor of Vietnam.  Without them, without the tenacity
involved in building and maintaining them, it might have been possible
for the American military killing experts to defeat the spirit of the
Vietnamese.  The only movie that has come close to showing the terror
of those tunnels--but too briefly--is Brian De Palma's over-praised
and rightly rebuffed CASUALTIES OF WAR.  Though CASUALTIES OF WAR is
based on fact, it loses its indictable punch in that rape and the death
of the raped aren't exclusive to the horror of war; movies using rape to
pontificate become cliches because, in a measure of our desensitized
times, rape is no longer as horrible as it is anticipatory symptom, and
it never explains the political machinations that result in war.
According to a blurb Pauline Kael gave to De Palma to use in the ads--a
blurb that did not show up in her lengthy review--CASUALTIES OF WAR is
the "greatest of the Vietnam War movies."  Similar to Larry King's
fourteen word blurb about HEAVEN & EARTH, hyperbolic nonsense has a way
of biting back, like bad karma.  The ultimate Vietnam War movie would
be the one that shows us that the enemy who never had to be knew us and
our weaknesses better than we did.  The more self-incriminating
anti-war movie will be the one that reveals American
immaturity--exposing our national inability to accept the harsher
reality of having lost a war we never had any business getting involved
in.  Vietnam vets have a right to rage against Robert McNamara and his
IN RETROSPECT.  One of the principal architects of youth in Asia,
McNamara acknowledges the war's meaninglessness, but, having learned
from the right wing crybabies, he blames everyone else.

Title
Review for Ultimo tango a Parigi (1972)
     Two of the best writers in America have written the two most
famous reviews of Bernardo Bertolucci's LAST TANGO IN PARIS:  Pauline
Kael's "Tango," published in the 10/28/72 edition of The New Yorker
(and reprinted in REELING and FOR KEEPS) and from Norman Mailer for the
5/17/73 edition of the New York Review of Books, A TRANSIT TO
NARCISSUS, changed to "Tango, Last Tango" for his1982 collection of
essays entitled PIECES.  Both reviews may be thousands of words too
long, but each has made some startling comments that we wouldn't be
wrong in guessing the writers now wish they hadn't so emphatically
divined.  Kael calls LAST TANGO IN PARIIS the "most powerfully erotic"
and "the most liberating" movie ever made.  It is, as we know by now,
neither, and in his autobio, Marlon Brando also doubts the worthiness
of such masturbatory praise.  And Mailer cuts the Empress down as "the
first frigid of film critics," which, however badly he might want it
so, isn't true. (If he had intimated suspicions of movie-inspired
lesbianism, citing some of the endless examples of her wet panty
descriptions of femmes, and noting that she was once married to a gay
filmmaker, his sarcasm might have been at least funny.) Of the two
pieces, Kael's is the more consumable, though minus Mailer's freedom to
repeat the movie's infamous obscenities because, unlike Tina Brown's
New Yorker, William Shawn had to be dragged kicking and screaming into
the slang of the late 20th Century.  And hers more panting: you can
nearly see Kael climaxing on her yellow pad; there's little doubt that
her pen substitutes for Marlon Brando's stick.  The review might have
been more deliciously autobiographical if she had flatly admitted her
zipless encounters; instead, she broadens the sex with no names as
universal passage, which, I'd have to concede, is true in my case, and
one assumes in hers, and perhaps yours, but not the experience of all
others.  Essentially, the piece tells us that we shouldn't fear our
inexplicably seedy biological appetites.
     Mailer's meandering text is a tax on our tolerances but, in the
major surprise of both reviews, he gets to the core problem of the
movie, one Kael doesn't even acknowledge as short coming: Writes
Mailer, "Yet as the film progresses with every skill in evidence, while
Brando gives a performance that is unforgettable, as the historic
buggeries and reamings are delivered, and the language breaks through
barriers not even yet erected--no general of censorship could know
the armies of obscenity were so near!--as these shocks multiply, and
lust goes up the steps to love, something bizarre happens to the film.
It fails to explode.  It is a warehouse of dynamite and yet something
goes wrong with the blow-up...One leaves the theater bewildered.  A
fuse was never ignited." This is the Mailer of choice; he gets right to
it, really sticking it to the hyperbolists.  Then he pulls a typical
macho Mailerism: he tells us that the more serious problem is that the
simulated sex isn't real, it's solo--it's Brando solo.  Well, as I
see it, Mailer, who's preoccupied with his adolescent, perhaps
homoerotic desire to compare his with Brando's--in his book Marlon
explains why Mailer wasn't given the chance--and Kael, who can't get
past her own lust to have Brando plow her, ignore what's even more
obvious: LAST TANGO IN PARIS was originally conceived as and remains
a story about two men.
     In their frenzy to be as hip as the participates of the sexual
revolution of the 70s, when the white class mirrored gay promiscuity,
Kael and Mailer avoid--either by design or rare involuntary
nescience--what's patent: that Marlon Brando's Paul and Maria
Schneider's Jeanne are the improvised heterosexualization of quickie,
nameless male-only sex, which came long before Erica Jong's discovery
of zipless joy.  What other way is there to make sense of the
debasement? Buttering up Jeanne's tempting ass isn't exclusively a
purge of Paul's torments--as Richard Schickel suggests in "Intimate
Strangers"--it's what he most likely desires for himself.  And Jeanne's
fingers no doubt an unsatisfying phallic substitute.  As the
degradation continues, Paul finds that he's falling in love with
Jeanne, but it seems more an escape than revelation of love through
sleazy eroticism.  What could he love about her that isn't a lifetime
of repressed regrets?  It's the finale that reduces the movie's punch,
and, where Kael implicitly approves, Mailer explicitly finds it
objectionable, as he should, pointing out that Paul's death is the same
death that concludes the original conception of LAST TANGO IN PARIS.
Through improvisation, to make sense of the death within the perimeters
of loose scripting and acting, Brando and Schneider try to legitimize
Bertolucci's retribution.  The damnedest thing happens: Paul is
punished for finding love.  It might have worked had Paul met his match
in another man; he'd be both unable to accept his attraction yet also
be so sexually heated by what he may be repelled by.  It could then be
possible for Paul to consciously or subconsciously want his nameless
lover to kill him as a means to resolve what he has no other way of
resolving.  Schickel calls his solution "heroic."  Death as answer to
unfulfilled love or desire isn't genuine heroism but waste.
     Kael and Mailer avoid Jeanne's line to Paul: "You hate women."
That's not to say she's calling Paul a homosexual, but coming close to
what he may be feeling at the moment--despairingly misogynistic: his
wife a two-timing hag who has just committed suicide, his wife's mother
a religious fool, his wife's friends are whores (one looking like
Barbara Jefford) and losers.  Brando improvises Paul as angry failure:
when he says not exactly to but of his wife's lover, "I wonder what she
ever saw in you," it's recognition of self-disgust.  Jeanne also calls
Paul an "egotist," and he certainly is--smitten by the exciting dangers
of dominance: when Jeanne, in an elevator, lifts up her dress to reveal
her love mound, it's practically a daughter's incestuous teasing of Big
Daddy.  (Vittorio Storaro captures this sexual inflation when his camera
scans Brando's huge neck and a not quite self-satisfied smile of
perhaps a sadist, or when showing Brando's menacing back: in white
T-shirt, it looks to have built-in the curvatures of a nuclear power
station's smoke stack.)  For some, their infantile, petulant, dangerous
fantasy will be highly eroticizing, and in Jeanne's case, as Schneider
plays her, it's honest: the underlining complexity of what appears to
be simple nameless sex overtakes her; she's at once liberated by yet
also fearful of the powers of primal urges.  Her accelerated animalism
pops up in sudden but correlative ways: in a subway with her young
fiance, she quarrels with him and they slap at each other, only to fall
in each other's arms.  The movie bogs down when Jeanne's movie maker of
a boyfriend intrudes, but during these sequences, we gaze at Schneider,
who's like a slimmed down Rubenseque Claudia Cardinale as child of
trash; her baby face is without defining features--her sinuses seem to
have a grass-induced puffiness--and her boobs, despite Paul's
prognostication of their future, already ready for the soccer field.
Mailer's macho gets it right:  Schneider "has nose appeal--you can
smell her."
     But not the right scent for Brando.  Everything about his Paul
reeks with malice towards women.  It's clear he's on the run from the
rancid aromas of the bitches in his life; his need for raunchy
degradation confirms it.  This kind of emotionalism engenders
unexpected, unsolicited sex--often between men.  And not solely
homosexual men: sex between otherwise straight men is probably a matter
of accidental timing, happening when all the extrinsic elements of
situations beyond their control merge.  A long time friend once
remarked that a "stiff joint has no conscience," and some thirty years
later, that truism is stronger than ever: no matter our moralistic
prejudices and "nevers," there's no way we can ever be sure how we'll
respond when the adrenergic forces of circumstance and sex take charge,
when the flush of a bulge takes charge.  (One of the most powerful
erotic impulses of gang banging is that men follow and experience the
heat generated by the first bangers--they're turned on by each other,
not the receptacle of their emissions.)  Brando says in his book that
the role of Paul was so emotionally draining that he'd never want to go
through that kind of pain again, and while you believe it, you have to
ask: just how honest is his creation?  About LAST TANGO IN PARIS,
director Ingmar Bergman said, "As it is now, it makes no sense as a
film.  I don't think it's really about a middle-aged man and young
girl, but about homosexuals.  If you think about it in those terms, it
becomes interesting."  I'd argue that the movie isn't about gays--it's
about a sensualist's idea of two men meeting and fighting to the death
their attractions to one another.  This might explain Brando's
drainage: he's invested so much heavy-weight improv on top of a shaky
foundation that his house of character collapses.  Brando goes as far
into improv as he'd allow himself to go; any further and we'd all spill
over into uncontrolled derision because his sublimation feels
dishonest.  We keep thinking that, despite his mastery of the creative
self-consciousness of his acting, which might also be the exposure of
the dissipation caused by the burden of real-life regrets, he's saying,
"I can't go that far, I can't give you what seems clear about Paul."
Kael suggests that Brando is photographed looking "ravaged, like the
Francis Bacon painting under the film's opening titles."  He's ravaged,
all right, and as sadistic, but not nearly as sexually disjunctive.  (It
is the second Francis Bacon painting used during the credits that is
more intriguing: the figure sitting on a wooden chair, with arms and
legs crossed, looks to have been the inspiration for the caricature
drawn of Kael for the 8/14/80 N.Y. Review of Books demolition job done
on her by Renata Adler.)  And, despite a debauched appearance suggesting
the early stages of gluttony, Brando's voice, getting even smaller and
more limited as the weight increases, doesn't lend itself to the
unrestricted framework of improv; it needs as much discipline as it can
get.  While Larry King's recent ninety-minute interview with Brando was
occasionally amusing--especially the fast slipping in of an
eight-letter naughty and the concluding kiss--it proved the actor isn't
capable of impromptu lies: he told Larry he's never been depressed and
one look at him tells us otherwise.
     Despite Mailer's once-held belief that the future of movies is in
improvisation, no one would loves them as an eclectic art form could
possibly wish for a steady diet of meaninglessness and hyped emotions
on rampages--we're getting more than enough of all of this on the news
and talk shows.  There are reasons why improv works for comedy: the wit
and speed of the generators must attempt to match the speed and danger
of the moment.  Audiences are also much more forgiving of performers
when their out-of-nowhere comic responses don't quite connect; in
drama, we can be very unforgiving when improvising is less associated
with realism of the moment than it is with shock values: Brando
mumbling an obscenity about God is decidedly fraudulent.  Despite of
LAST TANGO IN PARIS being hailed as a masterstroke of improv, I think
Bertolucci confirms that the only way drama, especially sexual drama,
can be permitted free association is by the appearance of spontaneity
that is in fact rehearsed and LAST TANGO IN PARIS is very.  As movie
makers, Mailer and John Cassavetes are experimental ruffians;
Bertolucci has the controlling sensibilities of a real artist, even if
he defrauds his own "breakthrough" subject matter.
     A more luxuriantly decadent metropolis than Paris is
inconceivable; the city vibrates with sensual willfulness without
requisite guilt--it demands you liberate yourself and shrug off any
need for penance.  And Paris of fall and winter is especially
invigorating and impulsive--its chill creates a buffer between you and
all the encroachments of daily living and tourists.  While Bertolucci
and Storaro capture the wintry freedom of anonymity, viewers will end
up preferring that they had used Paris more expressively--their idea of
the city seems to be one too many metaphorical bridges to nowhere--and
had refrained from the soft vaginal-toned colors because a dull glaze
eventually seeps over our eyes.  Helping the sex-loaded ambiance
immensely is Gato Barbieri's music--the surprisingly libidinous,
anticipatory romanticism of the violins and piano co-mingling with the
horny, jazzy sax; it's so swooningly concupiscent that it lifts you to
levels the movie only promises to get at.
     Some twenty three years after the fact, it can be posited that
Kael and Mailer produced false births--Bertolucci having pulled his
diapers over their privates, about which both writers believe they
impart intellectual substance.  How Bertolucci must still be laughing
at their whipped up verbosity and supposed candidness, although he
can't discount the effects of their orgasms on the box office, or
refrain from using Kael's in ads and as accompanying text to the
movie's laser disc packages.  In Kael's N.Y. Times excoriation of
Mailer's MARILYN, and partly a response to Mailer's piece on LAST TANGO
IN PARIS, which was partly a response to her review of the movie, she
wrote:  Mailer is "cut off from respectability, like our country; the
greatest American writer is a bum, and a bum who's starting not to mind
it.  The time to begin worrying is when both he and the United States
start finding virtues in this condition; we could all end up like
drunks doing a music-hall turn."  Re-reading their reviews of LAST
TANGO IN PARIS, that's close to how we end up feeling about the both of
them: these two overcompensating pugilists have been going at each
other for so long that it's we readers who feel punch drunk--reeling
from the absence of the perceptive simplicities and confidences they
somehow failed to slug each other with.  But real autobiography has
never been Kael's strong suit and Mailer's public contretemps and
betrayals are blamed on the bottle.  Our most provocative cultural
arbiters didn't deliver the goods: LAST TANGO IN PARIS is still a dance
of death between two men.

Title
Review for Year of Living Dangerously, The (1982)
     Scene after dark scene after darker, more humid scene--bring along
your wiper-included night vision specs--you admire the fevered touches
Peter Weir brings to his vision of Third World hell in THE YEAR OF
LIVING DANGEROUSLY.  Based on C. J. Koch's award-winning novel about an
Australian journalist's reckless pursuit for that next front page scoop
during the attempted 1965 Communist coup of the Sukarno dictatorship in
Indonesia, the movie, filmed in the Philippines and budgeted at around
6 mil, summons up the atmosphere almost too well--you can get mighty
depressed as you view the expanses of privation, the polluted waters,
the westernized whores waiting for the foreign press at a local
cemetery, the random brutalities of insurgency and martial law.  The
only other "geopolitical" movies I can think of (at the moment) that
have this kind of horror-as-beauty impact to the eye are Roland Joffe's
THE KILLING FIELDS and, closer to home, Roger Spottiswoode's UNDER
FIRE, in which Oaxaca and Chiapas (later to cause Federales much
trouble) are set-decorated to be Nicaragua during Somoza's reign.
These latter two pictures got caught in the cross-fire of current
politics and propaganda, with governments and journalists at war with
the movie makers for what they believed were distortions, inaccuracies,
out and out lies. (I wondered at the time: What pot is calling what
kettle more black?)
     Weir doesn't have an explicit agenda; in fact, he intentionally
avoids the aftermath of the aborted Communist coup: starting on
September 30, 1965, the ensuing blood bath took the lives of between
300,000 and 400,000 Indonesians.  But what Weir does is brave enough:
he injects the failed revolution into his romantic inferno of sex and
competitive journalism (for which Saigon is the top drawer
assignment).  Taking the safe position of being against hunger and
abject poverty, the director puts a naive Australian reporter named Guy
Hamilton (Mel Gibson) at the center of a moral and ethical dilemma.
Shortly before the Communist take-over, Hamilton is given by dishy
bedmate-British attache Jill (Sigourney Weaver) a secret news flash --
that a shipload of arms for the commies is headed to the country.  If
Hamilton reveals the info, he would not only be endangering Jill's
life, and his own, but also the lives of Billy Kwan, the part-Chinese,
part-Australian dwarf photographer most responsible for his limited
successful filings, and all the remaining foreign nationals.  At the
same time, his energetic quest to be a high priest of journalism
necessitates that he get independent verification of the still-secret
news, as well as to continue to file peripheral stories; while the
other journalists are content to keep low during the bloody turbulence
by boozing, eating and whoring, he carries on his duties with foolhardy
abandon.  Unlike UNDER FIRE, in which journalists commit the gravest
sin by becoming involved and taking sides, and unlike THE KILLING
FIELDS wherein N.Y.Times reporter Sydney Schanberg suffers a case of
the guilts over leaving his beloved Cambodian buddy behind, THE YEAR OF
LIVING DANGEROUSLY confirms the dangers of the naive who compromise
professionalism and risk lives for newsprint glory.
     When THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY was released in 1983, and
Linda Hunt, who plays the male Billy, won a handful of awards,
including the Oscar, some of us were not unfair, but, well, reserved
about the performance.  Partially because we were at the point of
overdose with one sex playing another--as in TOOTSIE, YENTL, and
VICTOR/VICTORIA (and, to a degree, THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP).  Those
reversals deliberate and comic and, generally, quite satisfactory.  In
Hunt's case, there isn't any intended capriccio; this is serious
acting, and Hunt got the part not only because she had unique physical
qualifications, but also because there really wasn't any other male
actor available who had the voice for the needed authoritative
elocution.  Fighting Hunt's performance back then, it seemed to be that
Guy and Jill and Billy had a three-way relationship that we couldn't
get a fix on.  The crux of the bond they shared was never really
stated; they knew "something" we didn't.  Today, I'm still not sure
what they knew, or what Guy and Jill really felt beyond disguised
bourgeois pity.  But now, minus all the publicity that surrounded her
then, Hunt's portrayal seems far more than a director's gamble or
desperate last choice.  Though there's a slight betrayal to her sex
when we hear her reading the wording of an invitation to a swanky
affair, Hunt's Billy is a complex hero as sexual eunuch; with
cauliflower ears and a bad hair cut that accentuate the Asian, Billy
has a face that looks like Gale Sondergaard crossed with Leonard
Nimoy.  Ever the uninvited yet omnipresent photographer (of gloomy,
doomed humanity), who befriends Guy, and who provides Guy entree to the
political factions of Indonesia, Billy is also a secret writer of
dossiers, keeping files on his "finds."  Having a penchant for things
Russian, Billy drops a tidbit about Tolstoy while attacking Stalin for
having "good discipline--he wiped out ten million." (That's an
underestimate by half.) And Billy is the real writer amongst the
foreign journalists--his eyes "see" the real Djakarta, the famished
Indonesia, and is the only one to recognize Sukarno as the "great
puppet master of the right and left."  Dressed in print shirts with
large pockets filled with film stock to downplay the breasts, Hunt is
never ludicrous--not even when dancing with Sigourney Weaver to
"Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On."  And the soundtrack's classics, which
accompany Billy, are incongruous-to-the-setting perfect: "September"
from Strauss's "Four Last Songs," performed by Kirite Kanawa, and
excerpts of "L'Enfant" from "Opera Sauvage."
     Watching Hunt in a role of a lifetime, you know that she earns the
right to steal the picture.  But she doesn't, or more precisely, she
can't.  No one could--not when you're co-starring with two super sexy
numbers like Sigourney Weaver and Mel Gibson, both of whom give great
heat.  With a youthful, almost petulant handsomeness, in a high
school-conservative do, wearing skinny, limply knotted ties and L.A.
beach shades and carrying a microphone in one hand and a recorder
hanging over a shoulder, Gibson's the spitting image of our worst fears
about journalists--a thoughtless Gung Dan.  But there's no denying the
power of his looks: his beauty at once disarms our defenses and at the
same time loads our fantasies which, I have no doubt, manifest into
nocturnal emissions.  Back in '83, when I first saw the movie, I told
friends who hadn't seen THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY yet, or the
previous year's ROAD WARRIOR that he'd become the hottest piece on the
international movie-beef rack.  I even wrote in notes that he'll leave
"women with soaked panties."  No one believed me--then.  When Weaver
first meets him at pool side, she lowers her sunglasses to get a better
view of him in a swim suit; when Hunt asks her opinion, Weaver says,
"Cheeky."  Stopping by Gibson's office, she checks him out once
again--giving him a below-the-belt glance that doesn't go unnoticed.
On what is their initial though informal date, Gibson and Weaver share
as a first drink something red-colored, during which he's being
boyishly insolent.  Suddenly thunder is heard and the rains pour down
and the camera moves on their overwhelmingly healthy faces that crack
into mile-wide smiles.  Jumping into a car to protect themselves from
the rain, holding glasses that are filled with a green concoction,
immersed in contagious laughter, the heat between them--and for
us--begins to rise.  We have to wait a bit for their first kiss--a nod
to the pent-up, erotic sneakiness of Liz & Monty in A PLACE IN THE
SUN.  Defying curfews and roadblocks, they speed past a blaze of
automatic weapon fire, so gloriously giddy with passion that they can
hardly keep their hands off one another.  After spending the night
together at Hunt's place, all of diplomatic Djakarta knows they've
consummated the affair and one envious journalist cracks to Gibson,
"You're looking a little pooped, kid." Exactly how we'd all like to be
feeling.
     Their sexiness notwithstanding, Weaver and Gibson are at least
quite adequate.  Let's say they get the job done, despite Weaver's poor
British accent--sounding as if it's a trial run for a vocal coach to
measure its deficiencies--and despite Gibson's runty movement (and
gleamy sweats suggesting a trick-as-trophy).  Weaver's like-no-tomorrow
chin matches her on-screen bulk--in some scenes her face and body have
an Amazonian hugeness--and at times she looks as if she could easily
squash little Mel.  She looks decidedly thinner when she's in a red
dress dancing, and only occasionally does it appear she's wearing
makeup. (In lobby cards, ads and the front cover of the video, she
looks quite cosmeticized--as if she had been done up by that expert
wizard, the late Way Bandy.) In some hairdos hinting at Mary Tyler
Moore, Weaver's Plane Jane is one of those vagabond career types who
has learned to put class in slumminess.  And learned to parlay
criticism into something constructive: when Gibson's Hamilton smarts at
her comment that one of his stories could have been better without the
"melodrama," he returns to the tape of it and realizes she's on to
something: it does sound like Tennessee Williams on a sap-sucking
downer.
     Better Australian movies there are--Fred Schepisi's CHANT OF
JUMMIE BLACKSMITH, for example (and his DEVIL'S PLAYGROUND ain't too
shabby, either)--and more exciting ones, like George Miller's ROAD
WARRIOR, a giant, hyper-scored what's-coming-after-the-bomb? "Argosy"
vehicle that is an intense, thrilling pleasure to be run over by.  And
there are more thoughtful, closer-to-our-experience features, like the
Australian TV miniseries THE BRIDES OF CHRIST, with Brenda Fricker
every 60s Catholic school pupil's recollection of the social and moral
turmoil started by Vatican II (and exacerbated by birth control and
Vietnam).  Weir himself has made movies more popular with audiences
than THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY--like the goody-goody WITNESS and
the retrograde DEAD POETS SOCIETY.  (He's also made two flops that have
been wrongfully neglected: THE MOSQUITO COAST and FEARLESS.  The latter
is a lesson about release dates: dealing with survivors of a commercial
jet crash, the movie opened in the fall, just when the nation was
gearing up to hop abroad planes for Thanksgiving, Xmas and New Year's.
It's not likely to be part of in-flight entertainment.) But THE YEAR OF
LIVING DANGEROUSLY gives the audience what it wants--Gibson and Weaver
locked in each other's embrace, escaping the approaching genocide.
Backed up by the haunting social conscience of Hunt's Billy, and
Maurice Jarre's Vangelis-in-the-tropics score, Weir mixes Third World
exotic with a tempered Anglo eroticism that remains his most effective
movie to date.  It's the kind of romanticism you wish Gibson, currently
mired in juvenilia, and Weaver, stuck in Purex specials like GORILLAS
IN THE MIST and "weep for me" gasbaggers like DEATH AND THE MAIDEN,
would find their way back to.  They'd be the reunion to bring to the
screen the rapture of Anita Baker.
