Authors
Keith Meng-Wei Loh
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Geronimo: An American Legend (1993)
GERONIMO directed by Walter Hill / story by John Milius / starring
Jason Patric, Marc Damon, Gene Hackman, Robert Duvall and Wes Studi
as Geronimo / music by Ry Cooder
     The Apache Indians of the southwest had fought off Spanish
conquistadors and the Mexican army before the U.S. cavalry attempted to
bring them into the system of remote and barren reserves that had been
the fate of all the plains Indians.
     An Apache war chief, Geronimo, and a small band of warriors broke
out of a concentration camp.  He fought a guerrilla campaign against
hundreds of United States cavalry and held out for months by raiding
from the mountains which had been the Apache range until the white men
came.  While the cavalry followed rumours and false trails from canyon
to mesa, newspapers in the east quickly made the defiant Apache a folk
legend, demonizing him and at the same time making him a symbol of the
vanishing frontier.
     It was only with the help of other Apache scouts that the cavalry
at last cornered Geronimo and negotiated his surrender.  Geronimo, who
had left the army concentration camps twice before, returned to the
fences and lived until he was old by learning to sign his name in
English and selling his autographs at 'wild west' shows.  Suffering
from tuberculosis and pneumonia, Geronimo died pathetically on a winter
night, alone, after falling from his horse.  He had had a vision that
he would die astride a horse.
     There is so much about Geronimo that is appealing as a story.
Geronimo the Man was a brilliant personal leader, charismatic and
proud, and immensely spiritual--a hero in the real sense.  The plight
of the Apache, like the story of Wounded Knee, was for those who stayed
in the reserves, one of suffering and inhumanity.  As Geronimo's
exploits became daily fare in the newspapers, the American government's
Indian policy became the subject of political machinations that
extended even to the President.  The hunt for Geronimo, himself, of
course, is the classic David vs. Goliath story become life.
     GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND is a disappointment on two levels.
One, that with such inspiring source material a movie can be so
superficial.  Two, that the crew of director Walter Hill and writer
John Milius could come up with a movie so boring.
     Both John Milius and Walter Hill have built up an impressive list
of action films, leading one to expect that GERONIMO might be at least
exciting, if receiving the standard Hollywood embellishment.  Milius,
whose accomplishments include scripting APOCALYPSE NOW and directing
CONAN THE BARBARIAN, has strung together a surprisingly slow plot
littered with speechifying and shallow characterization.  Hill, best
known for the "48 Hour" films but also noted for a decent film of the
Jesse James gang, THE LONG RIDERS, never quite connects the audience
with what is gritty, human story.
     Like many movies before it, GERONIMO: AN AMERICAN LEGEND adopts
the cliched device that one cannot tell a story about Indians (or a
different culture for that matter) without seeing it through the lens
of a white man.  The character of the young cavalry officer Lt. Davis,
played by fresh-faced Marc Damon, is provided to give us idiots a
history lesson and moral commentary.  What insight he gives us through
an ungainly voice-over narrative is debatable, however, because he is
inexplicably absent for many key events that might elude those in the
audience who know little about Geronimo.  His narrative seems necessary
only to tie together scenes that are strung along in a very loose
fashion.
     The greatest failing in GERONIMO is that we are never really given
a good idea of what motivates Geronimo, nor do we spend much time with
the character.  GERONIMO the movie is more about the people who try to
catch him than the man himself.  Wes Studi, in a much larger role than
his Magua in THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, is still not much more than
supporting cast.  His lines, whether delivered by aid of subtitles or
in the noble kind of English all movie Indians seem to speak, consist
mostly of wise sayings like:  "You white-eyes lie" or "your heart is
strong".
     We never travel deep into the Apache culture save for MTV type
filming of ghost dances, and a vague feeling that the Apache are very
religious and are meant to be free.  The brutality of the reserves
first forced upon the Apache are not shown, neither do we really
experience their lives at all.  There are several other Indian
characters who are anonymously portrayed.
     This is not to say that the dialogue of the white men is much
better.  Jason Patric (who looks more like Dennis Miller's lost twin
with each movie) is the only cavalry scout who has an affinity for the
Apache.  He is a man of clear sympathies, who is strangely unemotional
and is stoically played.  Gene Hackman provides a competent performance
as the general first sent to keep the Apache under control.  If you've
seen Robert Duvall in LONESOME DOVE you need not see him here, though
his performance as a bigoted scout (the Tom Horn character?) is the
most natural.
     GERONIMO is filmed in the same golden shine seen in DANCES WITH
WOLVES, with pretty vistas abounding but without a feeling for life
either in the saddle or on station.  Milius has written a film akin in
style to FAREWELL TO THE KING in which everyone and everything is
imbued with meaning, but where nothing seems real.
     The music by Ry Cooder shows touches of the sensitivity that
Cooder displays with his own music, but a bombastic orchestral score is
most evident, intending perhaps to impress the audience with the
majesty of movie.  It comes off as self-important.
     Even those seeking action will be disappointed.  There are
actually few scenes of battle between the Apache and the cavalry.  And
the one gunfight that is portrayed in any depth involves a superfluous
subplot in Mexico that does not involve the Apache at all.
     The best thing that can be said is that Geronimo is such a good
story that it is bound to be made again, hopefully with more depth.

Title
Review for Mariachi, El (1992)
EL MARIACHI -- LOW BUDGET ACTION, 'BIG BUDGET' EFFECT? -- 
     For those of us who have been raised on a steady diet of Hollywood
films and culture, the pre)eminence of the budget and of dollar signs
have come to represent a benchmark--a signpost--that, in the hype
media, at least, indicates the value of a film.
     Those absorbed in the Hollywood culture have come to follow films
as an industry and, consequently, have come to regard the budget as a
star on the marquee, and at times on an equal footing as the true stars
themselves.  So, then, the budget of LAST ACTION HERO, which can only
be guessed as more than the health expenditures of many developing
countries, should have equal billing as the formidable name of Arnold
Schwarzenegger and John McTiernan.
     If so, the marquee for EL MARIACHI would be ridiculously out of
touch.  It would read: EL MARIACHI / written and directed by Robert
Rodriguez / budget: US $7,000.
     $7,000 is surely a fraction of the cost of a Hollywood marketing
campaign in mid-sized city.  For a Hollywood seven grand you may be
able to rent cameras for an hour but you would not be able to pay for
their insurance.  Seven grand worth of film can be shot and dumped in a
few minutes.  You could not afford Arnold Schwarzenegger for any length
of time.
     Likely, you also would not have John McTiernan or even John Woo
helming your production, but you would have twenty-four-year old Robert
Rodriguez.  And if you are Rodriguez, you can hire yourself for nothing
and work between university semesters, beg for cameras, probably
collect a cast of actors willing to work for nothing or a percentage,
and *then* somehow find studio time for editing.  Your $7,000 would go
a far longer way in Mexico than in Hollywood, but not a lot more.
     EL MARIACHI is not a great film, but it is a decent action/comedy
in the mold of many Hollywood styled guns and laughs films that have
come to pervade the film industries of many other countries.  The
bustling Hong Kong and Indian film industries each boast output far in
excess of the U.S. industry and with budgets likely a third of the
average U.S. film budget for their most expensive action blockbusters.
Many, like EL MARIACHI will have come through on shoestring budgets
with very decent, even big budget effects.
     It took nearly a decade for the fame of John Woo to come through
to the U.S., a director of action films with a distinctive American
flavour but who out-does most Americans in dazzle and stunts.  On the
American doorstep, does the Mexican industry offer a similar boomerang
effect?  EL MARIACHI is not HARDBOILED by any means, but it is a
good example of how, in many places, a low budget means very little if
off-set by energy and vision.  Gussied up and given a recognizably
Hollywood cast, EL MARIACHI becomes a Van Damme movie or even
RESERVOIR DOGS, another example of how a small budget (though not
$7,000!) can mean very little within the U.S.
     The vision in EL MARIACHI is a familiar one with a twist just as
its character is American put on a Mexican twist.  It's a case of
mistaken identity: a mariachi player arrives in a town looking for work
at the same time as a vengeful hitman returns looking for the yanqui
crime boss who put him in jail.  Both wear black and carry guitar
cases.  But in the hitman's case is an arsenal; the mariachi has his
guitar.
     You can figure out the rest but it must be said that EL MARIACHI
is witty and well plotted.  The action is not complex, but comparable
with many American films.  There is an obligatory body count but in its
heart EL MARIACHI is a comedy that is well worth the time.
     EL MARIACHI's billing as an "homage to the spaghetti western" is
an irony that can't be missed.  "Spaghetti westerns" were, in the 60s
and 70s, examples of Italian directors like Sergio Leone outworking an
American mythos better than Americans when the dominant American
cinemacultural product was the western.  In the 80s, the dominant
American product has had to be the action-adventure (sourced, of
course, from the westerns).
     At the height of the action)adventure dubbed copies of RAMBO:
FIRST BLOOD PART III played to packed houses in Beirut.  While no film
would likely bill themselves as homages "to the 80s Rambo pictures," it
seems clear that the boomerang for this American product is coming back
with a vengeance.  Later this year, John Woo will be releasing HARD
TARGET starring Jean Claude Van Damme.  Is this any different than
Sergio Leone bringing back Clint Eastwood in the "Man With No Name"
pictures?
     None of this is to say that what are coming back are photocopies.
To do that would be to enter into the dangerous America vs. Asia
stereotypical battles which have come to litter the political arena.
Here we are speaking of culture and cultural spin.  The films that come
back may have been sourced in American "flavour" but they return with
decidedly different and original spins.
     While in EL MARIACHI we have a scene with the Mariachi in black
clothes walking down the street with a MAC-10 slung over his shoulder
in a seeming carbon of the TERMINATOR, Arnold was never carrying a
guitar case in the other hand, nor did he ever sing love songs while
under threat of castration.  The enemies in EL MARIACHI are the
gringos, not the dark skinned enemies of Rambo and the code of conduct
is decidedly latin.
     Finally, the most important spin that has come back with this
boomerang is a perspective on the cost of films.  Returning to what I
was said at the beginning, if we are to regard film budgets as an
expression of their value, then to see quality films returning with
budgets a fraction of the cost of their American cousins is to realize
that American costs and benefits have polarized.  The budget has taken
on an immense portion of the marquee in the U.S., where elsewhere the
cost is still a means, not a justification.

Title
Review for Sleepless in Seattle (1993)
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is every bit the equal of WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY, the movie to which most reviewers will be making their
comparisons what with Nora Ephron (writer and director), the gorgeous
and funny Meg Ryan, the beaming-smile romance, kismet, dialogue to die
for, acting in every corner as precious as diamonds in a large jewelry
store and even a bit part with Rob Reiner thrown in.
     This is a movie which will make you smile for an hour after it is
finished.  I've been very lucky going to the movies recently, running
into a quite a few very magical, very good looking films like MAP OF
THE HUMAN HEART and LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.  SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is
a capper to what has been a very good spring-summer.
     Two stellar performances from Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks are jewels
amid the many funny characters inhabiting SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE.  Meg
Ryan is a comedic actress of the first rank, perhaps of the only rank.
She's designed for everyone to fall in love with.  Tom Hanks,
thankfully, has lost many of his kidstuff mannerisms and puts forward a
mature and thoughtful performance as a widower who thinks he can never
find love again.  There is one scene, however, in which Hanks' comedic
skills really blows the audience over.
     The real star is the writing.  Nora Ephron is a genius.  The
dialogue is fast and witty and every bit as intelligent as in WHEN
HARRY MET SALLY.  The story is mature without losing its essential
magic, in that two people from opposite sides of America can find each
other through a radio show.  When I brought up MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART
and LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE I meant to compare their themes of love
and magic and happenstance. SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is full of the same
romantic fantasy but in a way that makes the me feel that the same
thing could happen to me.
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is beautifully shot, as well.  Three cities
are photographed like post cards: Baltimore, New York and Seattle each
have an atmosphere that comes through the screen.  And have I ever seen
a lingering look, a look of grief as powerful as this?  Simply, not
that I can remember.
