Authors
Zeke M. Towson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for No Contest (1994)
     Did you ever see "Die Hard?"  Imagine Shannon Tweed as Bruce
Willis, Andrew Dice Clay as Alan Rickman, Robert Davi as Reginald
velJohnson, and Roddy Piper as Alexander Godunov.  Make Tweed a former
Ms. Galaxy/Tae Kwon Do expert/movie star.  Make the hostages beauty
queens instead of business people.  Make the loot $10 million in
diamonds.  Instead of the company vault, have the loot come from the
senator/father of one of the beauty queens.  Change the office building
into a hotel.  Change L.A. into Toronto.  Keep the computer geek.  It's
all there.  DIE HARD at the Ms. Galaxy contest.  C-4 rigged to blow
the building, inept cops trying to rescue the hostages.  Davi giving
instructions to Tweed on a cellular phone.  Tweed running roughshod all
over the terrorists.  Snappy one-liners.  Certainly not an HBO
"original" if you know what I mean (and I think you do).
     For what it's worth, the movie is very, very disjointed.  I found
myself wondering time and again how a character made it from one place
to another, or how they picked up object A or item B.  The director
seems to have a fetish filming Shannon Tweed running up and down
stairwells.  I can think of maybe six or seven "stairwell" scenes, none
of which are in the artistic vein of Luc Besson.  Character development
is nearly non-existent.  Character interaction is pretty much the
standard bad guy/good guy fare, with a little twist that doesn't really
lead anywhere.  The main purposes of this film seem to be:
     I'm not exaggerating, almost every character is a potty-mouth.
The dialogue leaves much to be desired as well.  Aside from maybe one
or two scenes this movie really is DIE HARD re-worked.
