Authors
Gargoyle_Lord
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
This is a review of StarWars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace.  It will
probably not be like most reviews I won't cover  the acting special
effects and all of the visuals.  What I want to talk about is the
charectarizations in it.  Especially a very strong positive image for
young girls.
Quenn Amidala is a very good role model for young women.  She is
strong, confident, and very capable.  She handles herself with poise,
dignity, and confidence in whatever situations she is involved.  I
applaude George Lucas for her.  Long has it been since such a strong
young lady has graced the silver screen that isn't screwed up or
warped or played as an airhead.  Her charectar alone has given me a
renewed hope in the art of scriptwriting.  In an age that shows young
ladies as hardened or dumb blondes or any of the other stereotypical
archtypes she is a breath of fresh air.
To those that say that "science fiction" has nothing to appeal to
women or "girls" will be woefully wrong if they think to include The
Phantom Menace in the group without first watching it.  Episodes 4-6
had Leia that was a strong female prescence and a good image for women
to see.  But in Phantom Menace and hopefully the next two movies of
this trilogy there is Queen Amidala, a strong vibrant powerful caring
young lady of 17 that is a good image for not only females but a
generation of young adults that are looking for something out there.
Let us hope that the charectar of Queen Amidala will give them
something to believe in and to inspire them all.
